Commentary
The evolution of disability language: Choosing terms to describe
disability
Erin E. Andrews, PsyD, ABPP a, b, Robyn M. Powell, PhD, JD c, d, *, Kara Ayers, PhD e, f
a VA Texas Valley Coastal Bend Health Care System, USA
b University of Texas at Austin Dell Medical School, USA
c Stetson University College of Law, USA
d Lurie Institute for Disability Policy, Brandeis University, USA
e University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, USA
f Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, USA
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 12 January 2022
Received in revised form
2 April 2022
Accepted 13 April 2022
a b s t r a c t
The use of disability language in academic scholarship has changed signiﬁcantly over the past several
years. Although it would be helpful to have concrete guidelines and rules that could generalize across
situations regarding disability terminology, language itself is a phenomenon that evolves and varies over
time in response to cultural shifts. People with disabilities have varied preferences about the language
they use to describe themselves and what language they prefer to be used to describe them. At the same
time, disability researchers, including the current authors, are often given prescriptive guidance by
journal editors about the speciﬁc disability language they should use (i.e., person-ﬁrst language). Thus,
the tension between approaches to disability language underscores a need for open dialogue about a
culturally informed choice of disability language in scholarly publications. Accordingly, this commentary
discusses the history and evolution of disability language, explores current trends, and recommends
language for academic articles.
© 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
There have been signiﬁcant changes in the use of disability
language in academic scholarship over the past several years.1,2
Since language is a phenomenon that evolves over time in
response to cultural shifts, it is not advised to establish permanent
guidance about the use of disability language.1 Recent trends sug-
gest that people with disabilities vary in their language preferences,
with some preferring person-ﬁrst language and others preferring
identity-ﬁrst
language.2
Increasingly,
disability
researchers,
including the current authors, have received requests by journal
editors and reviewers to replace identity-ﬁrst language with
person-ﬁrst language in manuscripts or vice versa.3 Related, several
major journal style guides require authors to use person-ﬁrst lan-
guage. However, these requests and policies ignore the varying
language preferences among disabled people, including disabled
researchers. Accordingly, these tensions concerning disability lan-
guage underscore a need for open dialogue about a culturally
informed choice of disability language in scholarly publications.
This commentary discusses the history and evolution of terminol-
ogy, explores current trends, and makes recommendations for
disability language in scholarly writing. To do so, we examine these
facets of language from the context of writing and communication
in the United States. Ultimately, we recommend academic journals
allow for ﬂexibility in using person-ﬁrst and identity-ﬁrst disability
language. Similarly, journals should focus on ensuring that the
language used in their publications does not stigmatize disabled
people, including avoiding euphemisms for disability.
The history of societal, economic, and environmental disad-
vantages has resulted in health disparities for people with dis-
abilities and other marginalized groups. With the goal of public
health to improve health outcomes for all populations, it is
important to consider the potential impact of terminology on
marginalized groups. From language about substance use to body
weight, evidence suggests terminology contributes to attitude
formation, self-perception, and behaviors.4,5 Word choice reﬂects
dominant attitudes, which may further oppress or empower his-
torically excluded groups. Given the potential role of terminology in
improving health equity for people with disabilities, discussion
about the role of language in shaping our reality and subsequent
* Corresponding author. Stetson University College of Law 1401 61st Street S.
Gulfport, FL 33707, USA.
E-mail address: rpowell3@law.stetson.edu (R.M. Powell).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Disability and Health Journal
journal homepage: www.disabilityandhealthjnl.com
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dhjo.2022.101328
1936-6574/© 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Disability and Health Journal 15 (2022) 101328
behaviors is merited. Many diverse groups and social movements
have attempted to modify terminology to disrupt dominant stig-
matizing attitudes.6 This can include introducing new terminology
or taking back terms previously used in a derogatory fashion and
using
them
as
insider
slang.7
For
example,
members
of
LGBTQI þ communities moved to take back the terms “gay” and
“queer.”8 Word choice about disability stems from numerous
sources, including socialization, media portrayals, and medical
training.9 Like the LGBTQI þ community, some disabled people
have reclaimed previously harmful language, such as adopting the
word cripple (often “crip”) as a source of pride.10 Likewise, mad
studies has reclaimed the identiﬁer “mad” to describe individuals
with psychiatric disabilities and recognize social understandings of
the complex relationship between disabled people and psychiatric
services and systems.11 Ultimately, scholars caution that the
shortcomings of existing vocabularies should not truncate dialogue
around the evolution of language to describe disability.11
Words used socially and in public policy to refer to historically
marginalized groups have also evolved. For instance, in 2013, the
US Census Bureau dropped the word “Negro” from surveys, leaving
“African-American” or “black”.12 Likewise, differences between the
terms “Hispanic” and “Latino” are extremely nuanced and reﬂect
various geographic and sociopolitical differences.13,14 “Latinx,”
meant to address the intersectionality of gender identity and
ethnicity, has recently seen a considerable increase in its usage in
social media, advocacy, and academia.15 “Latinx” has received sig-
niﬁcant criticism and is far from accepted universally,16,17 but it did
not yet exist when Comas-Diaz predicted, “names that are appro-
priate today may be obsolete or even offensive tomorrow” (p.
116).18 Similarly, the social evolution of language related to
disability is also reﬂected in policy changes. In 2010, Congress
passed Rosa’s Law, named after a young girl with Down syndrome
whose family sought to have disability represented as diversity
rather than the stigmatization associated with outdated terminol-
ogy, replaced several, but not all, instances of “mental retardation”
with “intellectual disability” in US federal law.19
History of disability terminology
The language used to discuss disability stems from theoretical
models, or ways of understanding disability, that have framed
disability in the past and through contemporary culture. The oldest
model of disability is the moral model, which associates disability
with sin or moral failing.20 Terms used to describe disability asso-
ciated with the moral model include “gimp,” “cripple,” “handicap,”
or “imbecile.”20 The terms “cripple” and “lame” are traced back to
the early 9th century but were not perceived as stigmatizing until
the 17th century, demonstrating that what may be a currently ac-
curate term can change in meaning and impact across time.
Another long-established model is the biomedical model of
disability, a deﬁcit orientation that situates disability as a problem
within the person.21 Because this model emphasizes diagnostic
categorization and pathology, associated terminology tends to be
clinical in nature, such as all-encompassing categorizations such as
“the blind” or “the mentally ill.“22 Language stemming from this
model can reduce people to their diagnoses or conditions (e.g., “the
spastic quadriplegic”).
In the last 50 years, there has been a move away from the
biomedical model of disability, reﬂecting a shift in how disability is
perceived. For example, the social model of disability views
disability as socially constructed.23 Thus, according to the social
model of disability, the oppression and exclusion that people with
disabilities experience are related to environmental factors, cultural
attitudes, and social biases that inﬂuence how disabled people
participate
in
society,
and
not
merely
a
result
of
their
impairments.23 Moreover, critics of the biomedical model intro-
duced “person-ﬁrst” language, an approach to disability language
that emphasizes distinguishing the person from the disability by
referring to those with disabilities ﬁrst as individuals and then
mentioning their disability second and only when needed.24
Eminent rehabilitation psychologist Beatrice Wright championed
person-ﬁrst language in the ﬁeld of psychology as an effort to
reduce stigma and curb the phenomenon of “spread effect,”
wherein negative perceptions inherent to impairment would
develop into more global negative appraisals of the individual.25e27
Wright’s position was that to accentuate their humanity, the person
should grammatically be positioned ahead of the disability.26
Subsequently,
the
phrase
“people
with
disabilities”
became
widely adopted, including in many disability language guidelines
and the 1990 Americans with Disabilities Act.6,10 Parent advocate
Kathy Snow also championed person-ﬁrst language among advo-
cacy organizations.28 Thus, for decades, person-ﬁrst language was
promoted not only as a positive approach, but also as the correct
way to discuss disability.
The diversity or sociopolitical model is built upon the social
model’s emphasis on the importance of the environment, including
the role of prejudice and discrimination.22,29 The diversity model is
rooted in civil rights. Thus, from this viewpoint, “a perfect world is
not a world without disabilities but a world in which accommo-
dations and services are provided to people with disabilities, and
more important, disability is not viewed as inferiority” (p. 35).30
Like the sociopolitical movements of other groups, including
feminism, LGBTQI þ communities, and people of color, the
disability diversity movement has reframed the narrative. Rather
than viewing disability as a personal tragedy, the diversity model of
disability encourages self-acceptance and the deliberate rejection
of shame and internalized ableism. Because the diversity model
rejects disability as inferior and promotes disability pride, modern
disability rights advocates often elect to use identity-ﬁrst language,
emphasizing disability as central to identity.29,31 This is a wider
adoption of that of Deaf culture, which has long claimed the term
“Deaf” (with a capital D, denoting cultural identity) and rebuffed
the label of “persons with deafness”.31 It is the responsibility of
culturally competent healthcare providers and researchers to
remain aware of and sensitive to changes in lexicons used by
marginalized groups. This responsibility extends to the language
used in scholarly publications.
Re-examination of person-ﬁrst language
Person-ﬁrst language places the person before the disability
(e.g., “person with autism” or “person with spinal cord injury”).
Traditionally, writing and style guidelines, including the Associated
Press, the American Psychological Association, the American
Medical Association, and the American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association, as well as many academic journals, have required
person-ﬁrst language.1,32,33 Due to space considerations, person-
ﬁrst terminology often ends up abbreviated. For example, authors
often use the term “people with disabilities” initially and then elect
to use “PWD” in subsequent sentences throughout a manuscript,
making
the
relationship
between
person-ﬁrst
language
and
readers’ perception of disabled people unclear.1 Adherence to
person-ﬁrst language can also become needlessly cumbersome; for
example, having to avoid concise and accurate descriptors such as
“amputee.” More importantly, however, some disabled people have
questioned the continued importance of separating the individual
from the disability, which triggered a re-examination of whether
person-ﬁrst language achieves what it was intended to do.1,3
Notably, research on the efﬁcacy of person-ﬁrst language has
been mixed. For example, one study found that when presented
E.E. Andrews, R.M. Powell and K. Ayers
Disability and Health Journal 15 (2022) 101328
2
with a forced choice between identity-ﬁrst and person-ﬁrst lan-
guage, 76% of blind people surveyed preferred identity-ﬁrst lan-
guage, with no differences based on age or gender.34 Conversely,
another study found that 60% of state employees preferred the
phrase “person with a disability”.35 Still, interestingly, 26% of re-
spondents considered “person with a disability” and “disabled
person” to be equal terms. Another study measured attitudes
concerning disabled people by comparing groups using people-ﬁrst
and disability-ﬁrst descriptors and did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant
differences.36 In contrast, another study found a positive correla-
tion between the use of person-ﬁrst language and positive in-
tentions toward people with disabilities.37 Interestingly, one study
indicated that person-ﬁrst language was more prevalent in de-
scriptions of disabled children, while identity-ﬁrst language was
used more often to describe disability among those who were
incarcerated, ﬁctional characters, and victims, suggesting a perhaps
implicit bias that some disabled people are more deserving of
person-ﬁrst language than others.38 Further, in a study where
participants were asked to read several passages and divided into
two groups, those in the group that did not receive prior infor-
mation about person-ﬁrst language did not show any differences in
perceived
inclusivity
between the person-ﬁrst
passages and
identity-ﬁrst passages, while the group that received information
beforehand about the intent of person-ﬁrst language rated the
person-ﬁrst passages as moderately more inclusive.39 Finally, one
study found that person-ﬁrst language was used most frequently to
refer to children rather than adults, and to describe children with
the most stigmatized disabilities, such as autism and intellectual
disabilities.32 While this researcher does not question the good
intentions of using person-ﬁrst language, she points out that by
separating the person from the identity, person-ﬁrst language
implicitly indicates that disability is an undesirable characteristic.
Thus, person-ﬁrst language may have inadvertently overcorrected
and further stigmatized disability.1
Some argue that person-ﬁrst language could even be harmful
due to the unintended consequences of separating the person from
the disability.40 In other words, using person-ﬁrst language may
inadvertently contribute to a fragmented sense of identity, rein-
force internalized ableism, and impede positive disability identity
formation.1,2 According to Botha and colleagues, using person-ﬁrst
language can raise concerns about how disabled people feel when a
part of them and their identity is framed as something to be
eliminated.41 Perhaps the most worrisome of these implications is
the case of ﬁlicide, prejudicially referred to as “altruistic ﬁlicide,”
wherein a disabled person is killed, most often by a family member,
and the defense includes some variation of relieving suffering.
These assailants have even singled out disability as the intended
victim rather than the person, underscoring the reality that dis-
abilities can only exist within persons and the potential dangers of
emphasizing separation.41
Notably, person-ﬁrst language is rarely, if ever, used to describe
other groups of people. Although terms have changed and prefer-
ences have evolved related to other diverse groups, person-ﬁrst
language has not been recommended to refer to members of
other marginalized groups. For example, it is not mandated to write
people who are women, people who are Jewish, people who are
lesbians, or people who are Black. In fact, it would be entirely
permissible to describe a Black Jewish lesbian woman as just that.
Identity-ﬁrst language
Identity-ﬁrst language, sometimes referred to as disability-ﬁrst
language, places the disability ﬁrst in phrasing (e.g., “disabled
person,” “autistic person,” or “amputee”). As discussed above, an
identity-ﬁrst approach has been used for many years in Deaf
culture but has more recently been adopted by a wider swath of the
disability community, particularly those who identify as disability
rights advocates. For example, autistic self-advocates, many of
whom are scholars, have adopted identity-ﬁrst language.42 Some
scholars have posited that abandonment of person-ﬁrst language
and adoption of identity-ﬁrst language is an unfortunate return to
old ways of stigmatizing and objectifying disabled people. How-
ever, scholars such as Vivanti argue that identity-ﬁrst language is
“increasingly endorsed as an expression of positive social identity,
whereby the language historically used to dehumanize and
marginalize a minority group is redeployed as a form of empow-
erment.”3 In their response, Botha and colleagues argue that
identity-ﬁrst language as it is currently used is not done so in
congruence with the medical model of pathology, but rather initi-
ated by much of the disability community themselves in an effort
toward autonomy.41
Indeed, the current adoption of identity-ﬁrst language is a
manifestation of disability pride, consistent with the sociopolitical
or diversity model of disability. The difference between identity-
ﬁrst language in its present form and older dehumanizing termi-
nology is that current trends in identity-ﬁrst language do not
describe people as their disability (e.g., “the disabled”) or portray
disability as an afﬂiction (e.g., “the cerebral palsied”) but rather use
disability as an important identiﬁer, like any other group label (e.g.,
“disabled people”). This movement allows disability to be one of
several individual identiﬁers; for example, all the current authors
identify as disabled women.
Euphemisms and the importance of using the term
“disability”
Another concern relating to disability language involves the use
of euphemisms, such as “differently abled,” “physically challenged,”
or “special needs,” which are ostensibly meant to be less offensive
alternatives to the term “disability.“43 These terms were created by
nondisabled people, are often endorsed by nondisabled parents of
disabled children, and have largely been rejected by the disability
community as superﬁcial, infantilizing, and patronizing.2 “Special
needs” is a particularly popular euphemism, predominantly in the
educational system and among nondisabled parents of children
with disabilities. The term “special needs” began gaining traction in
the 1920s and peaked in the 1990s. Although its use appears to be
declining, it is still commonly used today.44 Gernsbacher and col-
leagues’ research indicates that outsiders view people more nega-
tively when described as having “special needs” than when they are
described as having a disability or having a certain disability.44 The
term “special needs” has been rejected by most adults with dis-
abilities, as it connotes segregation and implies special rights as
opposed to equal rights.43 Powell argues that “special needs” others
disabled people by implying that their needs are different than
those of the nondisabled population, contributing to the perception
that these needs are optional or burdensome.45 In the words of
disability activist Lawrence Carter-Long (2017), “a need isn’t special
if it’s something everyone else takes for granted.”46
Hence, it is essential that researchers use the term “disability”
and entirely avoid euphemisms. Indeed, the term “disability” is
widely used and universally accepted by leading state and inter-
national organizations (e.g., World Health Organization Interna-
tional Classiﬁcation of Functioning, Disability, and Health; National
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation
Research;
National
Council on Disability). Moreover, the social media campaign
#SaytheWord was created by people with disabilities to claim the
term and encourage nondisabled people to stop attempting to
avoid and replace disability as an identity. Outspoken activism
about identity erasure follows on the heels of global movements
E.E. Andrews, R.M. Powell and K. Ayers
Disability and Health Journal 15 (2022) 101328
3
like black Lives Matter, which highlights social injustice to illustrate
the continued signiﬁcance of race in the lives of black people.
Similarly, disability is an important identity that should not be
erased.
Importantly, many people with objective impairments do not
identify themselves either as “disabled persons” or “persons with
disabilities.” This challenge further complicates using language to
describe disability because many people with objective impair-
ments do not self-identify with any disability-related terminology.
Societal entanglement of culture, ethnic diversity, poverty, stigma,
and ableism contribute to how people with disabilities answer
questions about their identity.6 The reluctance to identify as having
a disability may also be a missed opportunity to reduce disparities
since recent research shows that those who both personally iden-
tify as disabled and feel connected to the larger disability com-
munity experience improved well-being, self-esteem, and quality
of life across a wide range of disabilities.1,32,47e50
Conclusion
Disability language has undergone signiﬁcant evolution in
response to cultural changes and advocacy, and the use of person-
ﬁrst or identity-ﬁrst language can be contentious in the disability
community. Person-ﬁrst language was developed with the good
intention of reducing stigma. Yet, as research demonstrates, it is
unclear if person-ﬁrst language works as intended, and its usage
may have unintended consequences. Ultimately, decisions about
language are personal and may differ based on several factors,
including whether disabilities are acquired or congenital, previous
experiences with negative and objectifying terminology, and de-
gree of personal disability identity.
The tensions between person-ﬁrst and identity-ﬁrst language
are also present in academic publishing. For decades, the American
Psychological Association (APA) Style Manual, used in academic
publishing worldwide, instructed writers to use person-ﬁrst lan-
guage exclusively.51 However, the most recent (7th) edition rec-
ognizes that both person-ﬁrst and identity-ﬁrst approaches to
language are designed to respect disabled people and states that
authors may use person-ﬁrst language or identity-ﬁrst language in
scholarly writing.51 We recommend that other publishing and
writing guidelines adopt a similar approach, and allow authors to
use either person-ﬁrst or identity-ﬁrst language in accord with
their preferences and that of the groups they are writing about.
Further, the recent APA Style Manual urges authors to avoid con-
descending euphemisms, such as “special needs” and “physically
challenged.”51 We, too, believe that authors must refrain from eu-
phemisms and instead use the term “disability.” At the same time,
we recognize that although the language is critical, simply chang-
ing how disability is described is inadequate for fully confronting
disparities experienced by disabled people. Thus, in addition to
questioning and reshaping the words used to describe disability, we
must ensure that we are doing so in a way that can have a real
impact. To that end, disability researchers must support disabled
people as we continue to reclaim and destigmatize language con-
cerning disability while also working with disabled people to
achieve health equity and social inclusion.
Funding
No funding was used to support this article.
Conﬂicts of interest
The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to report.
References
1. Dunn DS, Andrews EE. Person-ﬁrst and identity-ﬁrst language: developing
psychologists' cultural competence using disability language. Am Psychol.
2015;70(3):255e263. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0038636.
2. Andrews EE. Disability as Diversity: Developing Cultural Competence. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press; 2019.
3. Vivanti G. Ask the editor: what is the most appropriate way to talk about in-
dividuals with a diagnosis of autism? J Autism Dev Disord. 2020;50(2):691e693.
4. Kelly JF, Dow SJ, Westerhoff C. Does our choice of substance-related terms
inﬂuence perceptions of treatment need? An empirical investigation with two
commonly used terms. J Drug Issues. 2010;40(4):805e818.
5. Rathod S, Irfan M, Bhargava R, et al. Multinational comparative cross-sectional
survey of views of medical students about acceptable terminology and sub-
groups in schizophrenia. BMJ Open. 2018;8(6), e021461.
6. Nario-Redmond MR. Ableism: The Causes and Consequences of Disability Preju-
dice. John Wiley & Sons; 2020.
7. Croom AM. Slurs, stereotypes, and in-equality: a critical review of “how epi-
thets and stereotypes are racially unequal. Lang Sci. 2015;52:139e154.
8. Blazucki S, McMillan J. The association of LGBTQ journalists stylebook on
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer terminology. Available from:
https://www.nlgja.org/stylebook/; 2020.
9. Galvan R. The making of the disabled identity: a linguistic analysis of mar-
ginalisation. Disabil Stud Q. 2003;23(2).
10. Haller B, Dorries B, Rahn J. Media labeling versus the US disability community
identity: a study of shifting cultural language. Disabil Soc. 2006;21(1):61e75.
11. Beresford P. ‘Mad’, Mad studies and advancing inclusive resistance. Disabil Soc.
2020;35(8):1337e1342.
12. Fama J. US census Bureau drops ‘Negro’ from surveys. ABC News; 2013 February.
Retrieved
from
http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/OTUS/us-census-bureau-
dropsnegro-surveys/story?id¼18591761#.UZAJLcpCodo.
13. Taylor P, Lopez MH, Martinez JH, Velasco G. When Labels Don't Fit: Hispanics
and Their Views of Identity. Washington, DC: Pew Hispanic Center; 2012.
14. Valdeon RA. The use of Latin American, Hispanic and Latino in US academic
articles, 2000e2010. Termin Int J Theor Appl Issues Spec Commun. 2013;19(1):
112e137.
15. Scharron-del Río MR, Aja AA. The case FOR ‘Latinx’: why intersectionality is not a
choice. Latino Rebels; 2015. Retrieved from https://www.latinorebels.com/
2015/12/05/the-case-for-latinx-why-intersectionality-is-not-a-choice/.
16. Alamo HL. The x-ing of language: the case AGAINST ‘Latinx’. Latino Rebels; 2015
December 12. Retrieved from http://www.latinorebels.com/2015/12/12/the-x-
ing-of-language-the-case-against-latinix/.
17. Guerra G, Orbea G. The argument against the use of the term “Latinx.”. Phoenix.
2015;19. Retrieved from: https://swarthmorephoenix.com/2015/11/19/the-
argument-against-the-use-of-the-term-latinx/.
18. Comas-Diaz L. Hispanics, latinos, or americanos: the evolution of identity. Cult
Divers Ethnic Minor Psychol. 2001;7(2):115e120.
19. Portnova AA, Sivolap YP. Rosa's law as a symbol of destigmatizing in psychi-
atry. Neurology Bulletin. 2020;52(4):5e7.
20. Olkin R. Disability-afﬁrmative Therapy: A Case Formulation Template for Clients
with Disabilities. Oxford University Press; 2017.
21. Olkin R. What Psychotherapists Should Know about Disability. New York: Guil-
ford Press; 1999.
22. Smart JF. The power of models of disability. J Rehabil. 2009;75(2):3e11.
23. Oliver M. Deﬁning impairment and disability: issues at stake. In: Barnes C,
Mercer G, eds. Exploring the Divide: Illness and Disability. Leeds, UK: The
Disability Press; 1996:39e53.
24. Wright BA. Labeling: the need for greater person-environment individuation.
In: Snyder CR, Forsyth DR, eds. Handbook of Social and Clinical Psychology: The
Health Perspective. 1991:469e487.
25. Wright BA. Spread in adjustment to disability. Bull Menninger Clin. 1964;28(4):
198.
26. McCarthy H. A modest festschrift and insider perspective on Beatrice Wright's
contributions to rehabilitation theory and practice. Rehabil Counsel Bull.
2011;54(2):67e81.
27. Wright B. Physical Disability: A Psychosocial Approach. second ed. New York, NY:
Harper & Row; 1983. https://doi.org/10.1037/10589-000. New York.
28. Snow K. To Ensure Inclusion, Freedom, and Respect for All, We Must Use People
First
Language;
2005.
Retrieved
from
https://nebula.wsimg.com/
1c1af57f9319dbf909ec52462367fa88?
AccessKeyId¼9D6F6082FE5EE52C3DC6&amp;disposition¼0&amp;
alloworigin¼1.
29. Andrews EE. Disability models. In: Practical Psychology in Medical Rehabilita-
tion. Springer; 2017:77e83.
30. Smart JF, Smart D. Models of disability: implications for the counseling pro-
fession. J Counsel Dev. 2006;84(1):29e40.
31. Forber-Pratt AJ, Mueller CO, Andrews EE. Disability identity and allyship in
rehabilitation psychology: sit, stand, sign, and show up. Rehabil Psychol.
2019;64(2):119e129. https://doi.org/10.1037/rep0000256.
32. Gernsbacher MA. Editorial perspective: the use of person-ﬁrst language in
scholarly writing may accentuate stigma. JCPP (J Child Psychol Psychiatry).
2017;58(7):859e861. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12706.
33. Peers D, Spencer-Cavaliere N, Eales L. Say what you mean: rethinking disability
language in adapted physical activity quarterly. Adapt Phys Act Q (APAQ).
E.E. Andrews, R.M. Powell and K. Ayers
Disability and Health Journal 15 (2022) 101328
4
2014;31:265e282. https://doi.org/10.1123/apaq.2013-0091.
34. Bickford JO. Preferences of individuals with visual impairments for the use of
person-ﬁrst language. Rehab Edu Blind Vis Impair. 2004;36:120e126. https://
doi.org/10.3200/REVU.36.3.120-126.
35. Lynch RT, Thuli K, Groombridge L. Person-ﬁrst disability language: a pilot
analysis of public perceptions. J Rehabil. 1994;60:18e22.
36. Patterson JB, Witten BJ. Disabling language and attitudes toward persons with
disabilities. Rehabil Psychol. 1987;32(4):245.
37. Feldman D, Gordon PA, White MJ, Weber C. The effects of people-ﬁrst language
and demographic variables on beliefs, attitudes and behavioral intentions to-
ward people with disabilities. J Appl Rehabil Counsel. 2002;33(3):18e25.
38. Halmari H. Political correctness, euphemism, and language change: the case of
‘people ﬁrst. J Pragmat. 2011;43(3):828e840.
39. Gomes M. A study of the effectiveness of people-ﬁrst language. In: Proceedings
of the 4th Annual Linguistics Conference at University of Georgia. Athens, GA: The
Linguistics Society at UGA; 2018:; vols. 1e19.
40. Jaarsma P, Welin S. Autism as a natural human variation: reﬂections on the
claims of the neurodiversity movement. Health Care Anal. 2012;20(1):20e30.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10728-011-0169-9.
41. Botha M, Hanlon J, Williams GL. Does language matter? Identity-ﬁrst versus
person-ﬁrst language use in autism research: a response to Vivanti. J Autism
Dev Disord. 2021:1e9.
42. Brown LXZ. The Signiﬁcance of Semantics: Person-First Language: Why it Matters;
2011. Retrieved from https://www.autistichoya.com/2011/08/signiﬁcance-of-
semantics-person-ﬁrst.html.
43. Hojati A. A study of euphemisms in the context of English-speaking media. Int J
Ling. 2012;4(4):552e562. https://doi.org/10.5296/ijl.v4i4.2933.
44. Gernsbacher MA, Raimond AR, Balinghasay MT, Boston JS. Special needs” is an
ineffective
euphemism.
Cognitive
Research:
Principles
and
Implications.
2016;1(1):1e13.
45. Powell R. I Prefer that You Say I'm “Disabled. DAME; 2019. Retrieved from
https://www.damemagazine.com/2019/01/15/i-prefer-that-you-say-im-
disabled/.
46. Carter-Long L. Nothing Feels Real a Third of the Time. Transcript of Ouch Talk
Show presented by Kate Monaghan and Simon Minty. British Broadcasting
Company;
2017.
Retrieved
from:
https://www.bbc.com/news/disability-
42223698.
47. Bogart KR. Disability identity predicts lower anxiety and depression in multiple
sclerosis. Rehabil Psychol. 2015;60(1):105.
48. Bogart KR, Rottenstein A, Lund EM, Bouchard L. Who self-identiﬁes as
disabled? An examination of impairment and contextual predictors. Rehabil
Psychol. 2017;62(4):553.
49. Nario-Redmond MR, Noel JG, Fern E. Redeﬁning disability, re-imagining the
self: disability identiﬁcation predicts self-esteem and strategic responses to
stigma. Self Ident. 2013;12(5):468e488.
50. Zapata MA. Group identity in blindness groups predicts life satisfaction and
lower anxiety and depression. Rehabil Psychol. 2022;67(1):42e52. https://
doi.org/10.1037/rep0000432.
51. American Psychological Association. Publication manual of the American Psy-
chological Association. 2020 (seventh ed.). Washington, DC: (Author).
E.E. Andrews, R.M. Powell and K. Ayers
Disability and Health Journal 15 (2022) 101328
5
