[image]
IOS Press Ebooks
Guest Access
?
Log in
As a guest user you are not logged in or recognized by your
IP address. You have access to the Front Matter, Abstracts,
Author Index, Subject Index and the full text of Open Access
publications.
•  Home
•  Ebooks
•  Open Access
•  About IOS Press
•  Contact
•  FAQ
Search
[image] loading subjects...
[image]
Addressing Barriers in the University Campus Environment for
Neurodivergent Students
Authors
Osayaba Osifo, Mikiko Terashima
Pages
293 - 306
DOI
10.3233/SHTI240952
Category
Research Article
Series
Studies in Health Technology and Informatics
Ebook
Volume 319: Effects of Design on Health and Wellbeing
Abstract
About 15% of the global population is considered neurodivergent
(having different ways of sensory processing than what are
perceived as neurotypical persons). Persons with neurodivergence
typically include those with autism, attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), and Down Syndrome. Studies have shown that
many neurodivergent persons experience sensory processing
disorder (SPD). Noise, lighting, temperature, and aesthetics are
some factors that can significantly impact the quality of interaction
with the built environment for these individuals. A significantly
lower proportion of youths with SPD enter higher educational
institutions (HEI), hindered in part by physical design on university
campuses. Universities in Canada are now mandated to address
barriers in the campus environments for persons with disability.
However, space design needs of neurodivergent students are often
overlooked. We interviewed eight neurodivergent persons with SPD
(NPSPD) about their experiences as students navigating a university
campus located in Halifax, Canada. We asked what specific spaces
on campus pose barriers to them (to enter, traverse, and use), and
how the design should be improved. The participant responses
revealed many elements on campus that act as barriers—largely
consistent with existing literature. However, the participants’
comments illustrated more complex dynamics of these factors,
which can exacerbate their stress and anxiety. Oftentimes, barriers
are more to do with lack of information about the characteristics of
the space prior to using it, which would otherwise allow students to
plan ahead their journey to destinations and use of given spaces. A
wayfinding aid that informs what to expect in spaces or pathways
on campus would be a potential area for innovation, along with
multiple services to comprehensively and flexibly cater to
individual needs to alleviate sensory overload. Ongoing
communications about barriers across campus by all users of the
university campus would facilitate implementation of pragmatic
solutions needed to address diverse needs existing in HEI.
Download PDF
[image]
Contact
•   
•  IOS Press / Sage Publishing
•   
Copyright 2026 © IOS Press
Disclaimer     Terms of use     Privacy Policy     Contact    FAQ
This website uses cookies
We use cookies to provide you with the best possible experience.
They also allow us to analyze user behavior in order to constantly
improve the website for you. Info about the privacy policy of IOS
Press.
Customize Accept
This website uses cookies
We use cookies to provide you with the best possible experience.
They also allow us to analyze user behavior in order to constantly
improve the website for you. Info about the privacy policy of IOS
Press.
Accept Selection Accept
Necessary Preferences Analytics Marketing
