Citation: Chidiac, S.E.; Reda, M.A.;
Marjaba, G.E. Accessibility of the Built
Environment for People with Sensory
Disabilities—Review Quality and
Representation of Evidence. Buildings
2024, 14, 707. https://doi.org/
10.3390/buildings14030707
Academic Editor: Yung Yau
Received: 25 January 2024
Revised: 27 February 2024
Accepted: 1 March 2024
Published: 6 March 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
buildings
Review
Accessibility of the Built Environment for People with Sensory
Disabilities—Review Quality and Representation of Evidence
S. E. Chidiac 1,*
, M. A. Reda 1 and G. E. Marjaba 2
1
Department of Civil Engineering, McMaster University, 1280 Main Street West, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L7,
Canada; redam1@mcmaster.ca
2
Engineers in Motion Inc., 3 Sumac St., Ottawa, ON K1J 6P8, Canada
*
Correspondence: chidiac@mcmaster.ca
Abstract: People with sensory disabilities constitute a significant portion of society whose accessibility
needs must be prioritized in the design of the built environment. Sensory disabilities cause a gap in
the environmental information received, most commonly visual and/or auditory cues, that requires
consideration to create equal opportunities and experiences for all. This paper evaluates the quality
and representation of existing research on accessibility for people with sensory disabilities, aiming
to identify gaps and inconsistencies in current studies. By considering variations in disability type,
degree of impairment, and assistive aid usage, we seek to enhance the development of inclusive
accessibility standards. Through this analysis, we aim to provide actionable insights for future
research and contribute to the creation of more equitable built environments for all individuals.
Keywords: built environment; sensory disability; d/Deaf; visual; accessibility
1. Introduction
Sensory disabilities, stemming from various neurological disorders affecting sensory
information processing, encompass a spectrum of impairments, including visual impair-
ments ranging from legal blindness to total blindness and hearing loss spanning mild to
profound deafness [1–5]. Because of these disabilities, the individuals are missing key
environmental information that makes navigating, communicating, and managing their
daily chores and safety more difficult. According to the 2017 Canadian Survey on Disabil-
ity (CSD), an estimated 1.5 million individuals have vision disabilities, while 1.3 million
experience hearing impairments [6]. Consequently, ensuring equal opportunities in the
built environment becomes imperative, necessitating the translation of environmental
information into accessible formats [7].
People with visual disabilities encounter challenges in navigating spaces safely, relying
heavily on wayfinding strategies and memorization of pathways and landmarks [8,9].
Designing for visual impairment requires nuanced consideration, acknowledging the
varying degrees of blindness and corresponding assistive tools, such as guide dogs or
white canes [10]. However, despite these challenges, there remains a dearth of systematic
research investigating the specific barriers faced by individuals with visual impairments
in orientation and navigation within built environments, highlighting a crucial gap in the
literature [7,8,11–20].
People with hearing disabilities are presented with barriers to their communication,
especially when considering the signing population, and much of the associated research
focuses on the social aspect of accessibility within the interior environment. Communication
through visual means is one of the key features to accommodate the hard-of-hearing
community, regardless of whether the individual uses assistive hearing devices, lip-reading,
or sign language [19,21–23].
Overall, many of these gaps are attributed to several factors, such as the wide spectrum
of different disabilities leading to different perspectives on their needs [24]. Additionally,
Buildings 2024, 14, 707. https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings14030707
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/buildings
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
2 of 19
inadequate planning, a lack of enforcement of the available guidelines and policies by the
relevant authorities [12,13], or a lack of awareness and training of the needs and behaviors
of people with sensory disabilities result in overlooking them in several situations in the
built environment [7,10,13,17,19,25–27]. Moreover, in many cases, the problem is due
to the lack of involvement of these individuals and accounting for their perspective in
the dialogues or during the planning and designing of the standards [15,28,29], or due
to the limited representation of their experiences by using nonrepresentative, small, or
non-random samples in the interviews or surveys [8,10,15,30,31].
This study aims to assess the quality, consistency, and completeness of research papers
on accessibility for people with sensory disabilities in the built environment. The assess-
ment methodology is adapted from CERQual (Confidence in Evidence from Reviews of
Qualitative research) with the aim of establishing a degree of confidence in the evidence
and the extent of its representation [32–35]. The methodology consists of the following
steps. The first step was to conduct an extensive search of the literature, which includes
refereed journal papers and conferences. Secondly, a representative sample of the papers
published in refereed journals and conferences was selected for an in-depth review. The
review focuses on the objectives and scope, methodology, assumptions, representativeness
of the sample surveyed and/or included in the experiments, findings, deductive reasoning,
conclusions, and recommendations. Thereafter, the quality and shortcomings of the rele-
vant research were identified, and their impact on developing guidelines and standards for
a barrier-free built environment for people with sensory disabilities was discussed. The
reviewed papers were grouped based on the following built environments: pedestrian
infrastructure, outdoor environments, and indoor environments.
2. People with Visual Disabilities and Accessibility of the Built Environment
The built environment has been designed by sighted people for sighted people to
navigate and access, leaving people with visual impairments struggling to gather the sen-
sory information needed to orient themselves properly within the environment [14,28,31].
Failing to consider the accessibility needs of the visually impaired, the built environment
becomes hazardous and their daily activities difficult. The research pertaining to visual
disabilities and the built environment was categorized into three main themes: pedestrian
infrastructure, outdoor environments, and indoor environments.
2.1. Pedestrian Infrastructure
Pedestrian infrastructure refers to the built environment that surrounds walking envi-
ronments, such as sidewalks, crosswalks, and curbs. For people with visual impairments,
pedestrian infrastructure also includes accessibility features such as tactile paving, blister
blocks, and orientation blocks. Pedestrian infrastructure and mobility are where much of
the research is focused for the visually impaired, due to the complex environment that
impacts the mobility, safety, and accessibility of these environments. One of the most im-
portant accessibility requirements of the pedestrian environment for the visually impaired
is to facilitate their ability to orient themselves and reach a destination safely.
Atkin investigated the effect of degrees of sight loss on the navigation of urban
environments and what improvements can be made for a safer and more comfortable
experience [36]. The study included interviews with professionals and observed journeys
for eight participants with visual impairments in and around London while sharing their
wayfinding strategies on usual unaccompanied trips, using street features and landmarks,
as well as their level of comfort throughout the journey. Among the participants, there
were three long cane users, three residual sight users, and two guide dog users. Five of
them had undergone formal mobility training. The recommendations for each group of
participants were then developed based on these interviews. The study highlighted the
similarities and differences between participants’ needs based on the mental maps they
created to predict their environment. Participants stressed the need for signal-controlled
crossings, audible signals, or tactile control boxes/rotating cones, and to have smooth,
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
3 of 19
obstacle-free streets to reduce the risk of collisions during their trips. On the other hand,
due to variations in sight loss, assistive mobility aids, wayfinding techniques, training
received, and personal preferences for streets’ configurations, many discrepancies in the
design requirements of the pedestrian infrastructure were underlined. For instance, while
residual sight users have issues identifying the height of curbs, both long cane and guide
dog users prefer the use of curbs to provide them with a more distinguishable difference
between roadways and sidewalks. Also, long cane users prefer sidewalks that are not
excessively wide, whereas wide sidewalks are best for guide dogs and residual sight users.
These discrepancies confirm the necessity to improve the effectiveness of tactile paving
guidance and provisions that account for the different grades of sight loss and assistive
devices. In addition, it is important to make use of natural cues for a safer and more
predictable environment with even unobstructed pathways. It is worth mentioning here
that although this study focuses on understanding the differences between the different
groups of the visually impaired, it was conducted on a small sample size; therefore, the
accuracy of the recommendations should be further reviewed with larger groups.
A study conducted by Tennøy et al. aims to assess the quality of current Norwegian
standards in the planning and design processes of tactile paving systems and their effi-
ciency in the accessibility of the visually impaired community [37]. The review included
a comprehensive review of 36 Norwegian and international standards, handbooks, and
guidelines. Additionally, it featured in-depth interviews with 20 individuals representing
governmental authorities, organizations associated with people with visual impairments,
and practitioners playing a role in facilitating built environments. Furthermore, two semi-
nars were held with 21–26 attendees representing stakeholders involved in or working with
facilitation for people with visual impairments, and a case study was conducted examining
the previous work in a preselected bus terminal. The results of the study showed that
many of the standards prioritized natural lead lines over specialized tactile paving and only
suggested their use where warning is required or when natural cues are not adequately
available. Based on the literature, people with visual impairments usually tend to train
themselves using the naturally available elements for better wayfinding and orientation.
However, the standards did not provide details on how safe and accessible built envi-
ronments should be designed using natural leading elements. Instead, specialized tactile
paving was described in more detail, especially in complex situations. Additionally, the
results looked at whether implementing universal design can be an adequate solution and
pointed out several challenges due to the variability in understanding universal design re-
quirements among stakeholders, in addition to discrepancies between projects that interfere
with one another and the delays in consideration of universal design in the planning and
design stages. The findings implied a significant gap in knowledge on how people with
visual impairments navigate in complex pedestrian environments, utilize physical elements
in the environment, and how the design of the built environment can make it more usable
for them. The study provided recommendations such as involving more practitioners and
institutions engaged in mobility training for people with visual impairments in the research
and providing training for practitioners involved in planning, designing, constructing,
operating, and maintaining built environments.
Havik et al. performed a comparative field study and interviews investigating the
wayfinding performance of 25 people with visual impairments in two shared spaces com-
pared to two traditional spaces [38]. Shared spaces are a new design concept, also known
as complete streets, where the goal is to help integrate the motorized road with an inclusive
pedestrian environment. The participants ranged in the degree of their impairment, with
a spectrum covering complete blindness to low vision, their age ranging between 19 and
69 years, and their assistive mobility aids, with five dog and long cane guide users, 15
long cane users, and five without any mobility aid. The participants had to complete a
route, each containing one crossing, one or two turns, and walking parallel to the road. The
walking of the routes was observed from the opposite side of the road, which included a
schematic map of the path taken by the person with visual impairment. The test leader
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
4 of 19
walked approximately 1–2 m behind the participant to intervene if the person required
assistance. Assistance was given in circumstances where a participant was unaware that
they had begun walking into traffic. The comparative field study results showed that
navigating in an unfamiliar shared-space area is more complicated for people with visual
impairments than navigating in an unfamiliar conventional area, as orientation is the main
challenge in such areas. In shared spaces, the person with visual impairment, on average,
took more time to complete the route, had a lower preferred walking speed, and rated the
shared space design more negatively. The fully blind participants also required assistance
during the route in all the shared spaces tested, as there was no curb dividing the sidewalk
from the roadway. Shared spaces were consistently rated as feeling less safe, and people
with visual impairments would not want to complete the trip independently. This research
highlights a need for the concept of shared spaces to be addressed from the point of view
of a disability to promote the idea of true space. This study was limited to four spaces in
total, whereas studies with a larger sample size representing the full spectrum are needed
to determine the full extent of the effects on the visually impaired population.
A survey focusing on the outdoor travel experience and the mobility-related barriers
that people with visual impairments experience was conducted by Zeng [39]. A focus was
also placed on the role of mobile devices and GPS technology and their impact on aiding the
visually impaired with outdoor travel. Ninety-seven participants took part in the survey
with varying degrees of impairment, with 64 participants being blind and 33 participants
with low vision. The survey questions focused on the outdoor travel experience and the
use of assistive technologies. For barriers that people with visual impairments experienced
within the city, the survey emphasized their experiences when they travelled independently.
Most of the participants presented the issues of public transport stops lacking auditory in-
formation (82.4%) and traffic lights without an audio output (81.4%). Other common issues
presented by the participants were the failure to find the entrance of a building (64.9%),
ill-formed and irregular sidewalks (58.7%), falling from unknown stairs (47.4%), getting
lost (45.3%), falling because of an unknown hole (44.3%), and complex pedestrian crossings
(43.4%). One of the major findings of this study is that 36% of the blind and 21% of the
low-vision individuals were not able to navigate and orient themselves independently and
needed sighted companions to help. This highlights the need to improve the built area for
pedestrian infrastructure via accessible facilities and assistive aids. This research was solely
focused on understanding the mobility-related areas without providing recommendations
on remediation, but it highlighted many areas of the built pedestrian environment that
cause barriers to accessibility for the visually impaired. Additionally, the study revealed
that the current GPS systems lack the up-to-date map and environmental accessibility data
needed for people with visual impairments. This survey identifies areas that need to be
addressed, but the sample size is a small representation biased toward the infrastructure
available in developing countries. This may have influenced the results, as other issues
may be more prominent in these areas in developed countries.
A study conducted by Inagaki et al. examined the installation of newly designed
orientation blocks and the effectiveness of their placement to facilitate people with visual
impairments at crosswalks [40]. These orientation blocks provide great guidance while
crossing the roadway if they are placed in the proper position relative to the tactile walking
surface indicators. The main problem is that tactile blocks are often not placed perpendicu-
lar to the crossing, which confuses the person with visual impairment when walking off
the crossing. Using an experimental setup, 21 people who are totally blind examined the
position of the orientation blocks relative to the blister tactile blocks. The participants were
then video recorded to observe their walking trajectory. The orientation blocks were placed
8 cm, 12 cm, and 16 cm from the blister block, and then the deviation was measured at
the 10 m mark. The results of the experiment showed that separating the orientation and
blister tactile blocks by about 8–12 cm effectively limits the lateral deviation of 5 m from
the start point of the crossing.
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
5 of 19
The physical attributes that affect the walkability of the environment were investigated
by Bona Frazila and Zukhurf [41]. The research was conducted by interviewing blind and
people with visual impairments and performing statistical modelling on the facilities
required for walkability. Two surveys were conducted to thoroughly understand the
perspective of blind pedestrians and the key physical elements that impact their walkability.
To evaluate the effect of each physical attribute on walkability, a linear correlation between
them was assumed, in addition to the perspective of the blind individuals about the
importance of the facilities that needed to be provided. Walkability was found to be
affected by the effective width of the sidewalk, pavement condition, including tactile
guidance, crossing facilities, and sidewalk level, physical guidance such as tactile guidance
and Braille information, and security and safety facilities. These physical attributes need
to be carefully considered during the planning phase of the pedestrian facilities to serve
walkers with visual disabilities.
2.2. Outdoor Environments
Outdoor environments such as city parks present unique challenges to the visually
impaired, as there is less information available to them. These types of environments often
bring out feelings of discomfort and a need to rely on a sighted guide to use these spaces.
The overall area has not been researched as heavily as other areas of visual disabilities.
Siu performed a case study on the urban parks in Hong Kong with 12 people with
visual impairments to determine the overall accessibility of the park and the key directions
that lead to complete social inclusion for everyone [42]. The participants were interviewed
to understand the overall accessibility of urban parks, and a combination of site studies
and field observations were used during these interviews. Government officials and
planners were also interviewed to understand the current standards. Six parks of various
sizes in three different districts of Hong Kong were visited. The inaccessibility of urban
parks for the visually impaired was found to be related to three main areas: identifying
and approaching parks, the overall environmental setting, and the facilities inside the
parks. The participants had accessibility issues identifying and approaching parks, as they
experienced mental stress from trying to locate the park and often had to memorize the
route to the park. They often had difficulty entering the park independently or without the
help of a sighted guide. The overall environmental settings of the park were found to be
inaccessible due to the lack of tactile information about direction and orientation, and little
to no auditory information was available. Information about the facilities within the park
and their accessibility was often not provided. Therefore, the study suggested providing
further assistance by categorizing the information into in-advance and on-site. Although
the research highlighted the problem of the limited and poor-quality support provided for
people with visual impairments to navigate urban parks independently, it only considered
a small sample size of 12 participants.
The barriers that limit the experience of people with visual impairments exploring the
outdoor environment, in addition to the role of technology in improving these experiences,
were investigated by Bandukda et al. [43]. After interviewing seven people with complete
blindness and using thematic analysis, common threads and themes were identified. The
participants varied in their location and age (20–60 years). The interviews, which were
conducted over the phone and video calls, contained generic and specific questions about
the participants’ experiences. Three key themes were analyzed: independence, knowledge
of the environment, and sensory experiences. The “independence” of a person with visual
impairment is often negatively impacted by the lack of wayfinding information and land-
marks, which makes the outdoor environment more physically and mentally demanding.
The “knowledge of the environment” theme reflected the fact that a person with visual
impairment will almost always need to be accompanied by a sighted companion. The need
for the sighted guide stems not only from a need for help with orientation but also for a
description of the visual environment. Finally, the “sensory experiences” theme helped
people with visual impairments identify the environment around them. These sensory
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
6 of 19
characteristics can be a change in tactile sensation from the ground, sounds of flowing
water, and sounds from birds, which help indicate the presence of trees. The study revealed
the gap between existing technology and human–computer interaction (HCI) research
in outdoor environments, the need to provide an independent navigating experience for
people with visual impairments in outdoor environments without the need for sighted
companions, and the lack of natural landmarks and clues that force the people with visual
impairments to use navigation apps that lack accessibility features. One of the interesting
findings of the paper is the discrepancies between the perspectives of different individuals
when describing their needs.
2.3. Indoor Environments
Navigating indoor environments represents the biggest challenge for people with
visual impairments, especially when exploring unfamiliar spaces without clear guidance
and the availability of assistive aids [16,44]. Jeamwatthanachai et al. performed a survey to
understand the challenges, behaviors, and strategies used by the visually impaired when
navigating an unfamiliar indoor environment [45]. The survey included 45 participants of
whom 15 experts and 30 people with visual impairments commented on the accessibility
of the indoor environments. Of the 30 people with visual impairments, 22 self-reported
as blind/severely sight impaired, and eight participants were sighted impaired/partially
sighted. Both the sighted and visually impaired completed 18 questions, which were split
into five categories regarding indoor navigation by the visually impaired. Five types of
buildings were examined, which were further broken down into four room types and
analyzed based on the level of difficulty and confidence in using the space. Every person
with a visual impairment was asked to rate the level of difficulty (easy, moderate, or hard)
and their level of confidence in navigating space (no confidence or confidence). After rating
the buildings and spaces, they were asked to give comments on their reasons for the level of
difficulty or lack of confidence in navigating the space. The results of the study confirmed
that the main challenge facing people with visual impairments is the fear of navigating
unfamiliar indoor spaces independently and the time it takes them to become familiar with
the space. Therefore, they need to have a sighted guide before building the confidence
to explore these spaces with the help of assistive aids. The recommendations are to have
different alternatives for navigation that help them to develop confidence and create a safer
environment, in addition to providing information about the obstacles and barriers that
might impede their accessibility with the help of landmarks and environmental cues such
as light, noise, and smell. The study showed that certain types of buildings and sizes of
rooms do cause a large difficulty in the accessibility of the indoor environment. While the
deduced conclusions and recommendations are useful, they were based on a very small
sample size that may not be representative of all people with visual impairments.
3. People with Hearing Disabilities and Accessibility of the Built Environment
The everyday built environment is not typically designed for auditory cues, even
though they play a large role in the ability to communicate within space. As communication
is often done verbally, those in the d/Deaf community may be unable to communicate
if visual cues are unavailable. Our research revealed that much of the research related
to sensory disabilities focuses on visual impairments, and fewer studies investigate the
requirements of people with hearing impairments. Furthermore, indoor environments
appear to cause more barriers for people in the d/Deaf community. Without actively
creating a barrier-free space, the ability of people with hearing impairments to communicate
with others when indoors will remain limited. The issues presented in indoor environments
for people who are d/Deaf are largely related to communication and safety. Since most of
the barriers to accessibility that the d/Deaf community experiences are related to social
problems, most of the research related to the built environment is looking at how to improve
barriers to social problems, such as improving communication.
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
7 of 19
As an attempt to cope with and improve the surrounding indoor environments for
the d/Deaf community, DeafSpace was introduced in 2005 as a set of architectural de-
sign space principles that account for a correlation between the built environment and
the senses [21,46]. The principles of DeafSpace were collaboratively developed by the
hearing architect Hansel Bauman and students at Gallaudet University, an American uni-
versity designed for the accommodation of students who are d/Deaf. The five concepts
of the DeafSpace are “Sensory Reach” by utilizing visual cues to promote awareness of
the surroundings, “Space and Proximity” by maintaining appropriate distance during con-
versations to accommodate the signing space, “Mobility and Proximity” through keeping
an adequate signing space between individuals walking while talking, “Light and Color”
through modulating natural light attuned to d/Deaf eyes, and finally “Acoustics” through
minimizing sources of background noise. Edwards and Harold [21] discussed the principle
of DeafSpace relative to the concept of Universal Design. While Universal Design focuses
on providing standardized and universal barrier-free spaces for all types of people, it was
criticized for failing to consider the particularities of the d/Deaf community. The study
highlighted some of the criticisms of DeafSpace. Due to the limited number of buildings
adopting the DeafSpace design, it may not meet the end goals of the users. An example
is the implementation of curved corners, which are designed to allow the d/Deaf to see
farther around them and avoid having people bump into each other, but in practice, people
tend to hug the corner. Overall, DeafSpace emphasizes flexible and innovative designs that
account for acoustic environments and that should not conflict with Universal Design, yet
understanding their relationship together will require time. There are still uncertainties
about the spaces DeafSpace can produce specifically for the d/Deaf community; otherwise,
it will just remain a set of rules and principles.
The reliance on visual emphasis has been criticized in Western architecture as it
alienates people with different needs. For that reason, Pérez Liebergesell et al. investigated
the potential to connect people by exploring the experiences of George Balsley, an architect
who is d/Deaf who utilized vision in his designs reflecting the interaction of visual and
spatial dynamics in sign language [23]. The study was based on interviews and observations
about the design of his building, the Sorenson Language and Communication Center (SLCC)
in Washington, DC. The SLCC resides at Gallaudet University; therefore, its accessible
design for the d/Deaf community is highly important. It is important to note that only the
architect was included in the interview to understand his design. The goal of this study
was to understand the designs that Balsley implemented to increase the accessibility of
the building for the d/Deaf community. Balsley noted that one of the main concepts to
consider when designing a space for the d/Deaf is the need for visual communication and
the space required to implement it. To have the required space for visual communication,
it is necessary to design elements such as open spaces, glass walls, rounded corners, and
automatic closing doors. The d/Deaf community is reliant on visual cues to experience
their environment, which leads to the design being focused on translating sounds into
visual cues. The SLCC building shows this with the decision to move the elevator into the
center of the atrium and make it clear so that individuals who are d/Deaf can see if the
elevator is moving or not.
To further investigate the visual needs the d/Deaf community relies on when using
sign language, Azalia et al. discussed the concept of spatial proximity and what space con-
figurations can support their communication in public places like cafés [47]. Proxemic space
considers not only the amount of space needed for sign language but also the preferred
distance that the conversations take place at for the comfort of the individual. Anthropolo-
gist Edward Hall introduced the concept of interpersonal distances characterizing Western
culture, where the proxemic zones are broken up into four categories: intimate, personal,
social, and public space [48]. These proxemic zones stem from the tactile and visual reach
needed to communicate. When designing layouts within buildings to accommodate the
d/Deaf community, the target zones for design are the personal, social, and public spaces.
Personal space is considered 46–120 cm of sensory reach, and it is the optimal space for sign
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
8 of 19
language and lip reading with friends and family. Social Space is considered 120–370 cm,
which is optimal space for sign language between acquaintances. Public space is considered
any space above 370 cm. The results were used to analyze Kopi Tuli, a café for the d/Deaf
community, and the observations showed that providing a variety of proxemic zones,
with the arrangement of tables and furniture and the use of semi-reflective surfaces and
transparent materials, allowed for a variety of the d/Deaf community to feel comfortable
while still having easy communication. This is shown by the variety of social and public
proxemic zones being available, allowing the d/Deaf community to pick the areas that feel
comfortable and accessible to them. It is important to note that the experiment took place
in a café considered a place for the d/Deaf community.
Another study was conducted by O’Brien, where five academics who are d/Deaf were
interviewed to understand and experience how the academics who are d/Deaf navigate
the physical environments of their workplaces at Higher Education Institutes (HEI) [22].
With the concept of DeafSpace expanding into how individuals who are d/Deaf change
their environment, many individuals in HEI must adapt their workspace to fit their needs.
The walking interviews provided the ability to see how sign language communication is
affected by the built environment, or the DeafSpace concept of perceived space. Several
of the hallways and pathways did not provide enough width for two signing individuals
to walk side by side, as there was not enough space to comfortably articulate and see
the whole signing space. Another barrier to the accessibility of pathways and hallways
was the obstacles, which needed O’Brien or the participant to guide each other around
during the conversation. Adaptation within the perceived space is also important for
the safety and accessibility of people who are d/Deaf. Examples of these adaptations
include fire alarms with flashing lights, flashing doorbells, or fire alarms that connect to
the individual’s phone. The DeafSpace principles often cause a conflict between d/Deaf
and hearing values, such as the concept of tactile sensation from floorboards. While the
tactile sensation helps the d/Deaf identify people around them, they also have a concern
about the amount of noise the floor makes, as they do not want to disturb the hearing
people around them. Other aspects of making the spaces ‘deaf’ are through the concept
of the lived space, a sub-concept of DeafSpace. This is shown through adjustments that
the people who are d/Deaf make the space more accessible to them. Within the context of
O’Brien’s conversation with individuals who are d/Deaf in HEI, moving desks to make the
office more deaf-friendly was a common one. This consisted of moving the desk to face
the door or strategically placing mirrors, so they were aware if someone wanted to enter
the office. Another concept discussed was the conceived space, which identified issues
with university planning. The main issue addressed was the lack of windows on doors, as
without them, individuals who are d/Deaf cannot tell when someone is trying to enter their
office. Overall, the study strongly emphasizes that even minor adjustments that account
for individual spatial experiences can foster an inclusive environment for all while also
maximizing the productivity of academics who are d/Deaf in their workplace.
4. Analysis and Discussion
This study aims not to review the state of knowledge but rather to analyze the sound-
ness and completeness of the refereed papers that document the accessibility of the built
environment for people with sensory disabilities, specifically the completeness of the ex-
periments and confidence in the results, conclusions, and recommendations. Towards such
objectives, qualitative and quantitative analyses were carried out, with the former focusing
on the people with sensory disabilities and the diversity of the community, and on the
different types of built environment, and the latter on whether the experimental results are
a true representation of the population. It should be noted that the search revealed a much
smaller number of papers on the accessibility of the built environment for people with
sensory impairments compared to the total number of papers published on the accessibility
of people with sensory disabilities.
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
9 of 19
Sensory disabilities require information perceived by one sense to be translated into
another. When looking at sensory disabilities, general research often groups visual and
hearing disabilities together, although their needs are different and at times contradictory.
For visual impairments, visual cues are commonly translated into tactile or auditory cues
within the environment [8,14,31,37,40,45]. Strong colour and tonal contrasts can be used
as well to help residual sight users provide missing information [8,31,45]. Alternatively,
people with auditory or hearing disabilities rely on clear visual cues to help provide the
missing information from the lack of sound [19,21–23,47]. Therefore, due to the opposite
types of sensory cues, the important distinctions between the two communities need to
be properly addressed [24]. To illustrate, the use of glass walls represents a good example
where, for the people who are d/Deaf, they help provide accessible levels of communication
while providing a visual separation of spaces [23]. Then, again, for the visually impaired,
glass walls are problematic for those who rely on residual vision as they cannot easily
detect the glass. As such, the distinct needs of individuals with sensory disabilities should
be treated separately and critically studied to ensure that the accessibility measures for one
group do not limit the accessibility of the other groups [21].
Examination of the Deaf communities reveals that they are diverse, with people
identifying as Deaf, DeafBlind, DeafDisabled, Hard of Hearing, and Late Deafened. Among
them, there are variations in the level of hearing, age of onset, educational background, and
communication methods [49]. Similarly, the visually impaired community includes people
with different degrees of residual sight, such as light perception, severe vision impairment,
or complete blindness [50]. Moreover, people in both the Deaf and Blind communities
employ different assistive devices to enhance their accessibility when navigating the built
environment. Therefore, it is important to understand the different needs created by the
various assistive devices and the degree of impairment loss to properly design for their
needs. For instance, long-cane users are far more reliant on tactile information to guide
them [36]. Multiple studies have highlighted that there is little understanding of how the
visually impaired community orient themselves within the built environment, especially
when considering the pedestrian and outdoor environments [36,37,42,43]. The differences
in needs among the visually impaired based on their degree of impairment highlight the
need to better understand the best practices for the implementation of accessible features
for the entire visually impaired community [36,38]. This implies that studies need to
distinguish not only between the needs of the Deaf and Blind community but also the
diversity of the individuals that form the community.
When dealing with the built environment, the research surrounding indoor environ-
ments for people with sensory disabilities shows that barriers to accessibility stem from
different areas. Hearing impairment focuses on the visual aspect of the space and the space
needed for communication, whereas visual impairment in general concentrates on the
orientation ability of the individual. For the hearing impaired, one of the areas most ad-
dressed by DeafSpace is looking at the space required for the use of effective sign language,
as the watcher needs a full view of the signing space. On the other hand, research on visual
impairments focuses on the ability of people with visual impairments to orient themselves
within an environment and the size of space that impacts their ability.
Quantitatively, the review revealed that the sample size used to conduct the experi-
ment and deduce observations, conclusions, and recommendations is not representative of
the population. Especially when recognizing the diversity of the groups and the uniqueness
of the individuals’ needs. Different methods exist to estimate the sample size, such as power
analysis, random sampling, convenience sampling, or stratified sampling. Statistically, the
sample size depends on the size of the population, the precision of the estimates, the confi-
dence level in the results, the variation in the population, and to some extent the resources
available to conduct the study; however, not all methods employ them [51–53]. When
reviewing the published research, it is evident that they used the convenience sampling ap-
proach, which is the simplest and lowest-cost approach. However, the disadvantages of the
convenience approach are sampling bias, selection bias, low external validity, and the fact
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
10 of 19
that it is difficult, if not impossible, to generalize data or break it down into subcategories.
Moreover, the size of the sample is far too small to be representative, even for convenience
sampling, where a minimum of 100 and a maximum of 1000 are usually suggested. For
reference, the sample size can be determined statistically using the following relationships
when the population size is unknown [Equation (1)] or known [Equation (2)], respectively.
n = Z2 ∗p(1 −p)
e2
(1)
n =
Z2 ∗p(1 −p)
e2
,
1 +
 Z2 ∗p(1 −p)
Ne2

(2)
where Z is the Z-Score and for 90% Z-score = 1.645, e is the margin of error taken as 10%, p
is the standard deviation taken as 0.5, and P is the population size. According to Statistics
Canada, there were 7.4% and 5.6% of Canadians with vision and hearing impairments
in 2022, respectively [54]. The previous census on Deaf, Deafened, and Hard-of-Hearing
reported a range of one out of every twenty-five Canadians (1:25) to one out of every
eight Canadians (1:8) having impaired hearing. By assuming that Canada’s population is
comparative to the U.S. and that Canada has 1/10th the population of the U.S., the Canadian
Association of the Deaf reported that there were approximately 357,000 profoundly deaf
and deafened Canadians and possibly 3.21 million hard-of-hearing Canadians in 2015 [55].
The National Institute on Deafness and other Communication Disorders reported that
approximately 15% of American adults aged 18 and over report some trouble hearing [56]
and that one in eight people in the U.S. aged 12 or older has hearing loss in both ears, based
on standard hearing examinations [57]. If one deduces that there are at least 350,000 Deaf
and Deafened Canadians, then the sample size to conduct a scientific study according to
Equations (1) and (2) is 96. However, to conduct a meaningful statistical analysis, studies
need to account for the diversity of hearing impairments within the population by applying
the stratification sampling approach. Accordingly, the sample size needs to be at least
96 people for each stratum.
In the province of Ontario in Canada, there are an estimated 189,000 people who are
partially sighted or blind, which is slightly greater than the 7.4% reported by Statistics
Canada. In 2015, 3.44% of the worldwide population had distance visual impairment, of
whom 0.49% were blind and 2.95% had moderate-to-severe visual impairment [58]. For
Canada, if one accepts that Ontario has 189,000 people with visual impairments, then the
sample size to conduct a scientific study according to Equations (1) and (2) is 96. Similarly,
if one considers the population of Toronto Central LHIN boundaries, which is estimated
to be about 17,344 people that are partially sighted or blind [59], then the corresponding
sample size is found to be equal to 96 persons per stratum to account for the diversity in
impairment within the population and the different assistive devices.
From the reviewed literature, the ratio of papers studying hearing impairments com-
pared to visual impairments on accessibility of built environments is 1 to 3. Closer exami-
nation reveals that most of the research surrounding visual impairment is directed towards
pedestrian safety, specifically the interaction between pedestrians and the surrounding
environment [14,20,30,39,41], as shown in Figure 1a, whereas the research in other areas of
the built environment, such as the accessibility of public transportation and indoor environ-
ments, is limited [11,27,45]. Every environment presents unique challenges to people with
visual impairments in the niche areas that they serve. Of significance is the observed gap in
research due to the design environments not being actively understood with the visually
impaired community in mind. Research should be directed towards understanding the
wayfinding process and how to formalize it as a required component of the standards.
Wayfinding includes the collective use of tactile paving, lead lines, and sounds in the
environment that the visually impaired use to orient themselves [36,37,40,42,43].
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
11 of 19
 
(a) 
(b) 
67%
22%
11%
0%
0%
100%
Pedestrian infrastructure
Outdoor environments
Indoor environments
Figure 1. Distribution of research studies based on built environments for (a) visual impairments;
(b) hearing impairments.
The reviewed research on the d/Deaf community is solely focused on the indoor
environment, as shown in Figure 1b, specifically addressing safety and signing spatial con-
siderations [22]. Further research on including d/Deaf design in building standards, such as
defining the amount of space needed in hallways for proper signing, is an important step to
ensuring that buildings become more accessible and comply with the standards. DeafSpace,
which places a large focus on visual cues its effects on people with different disabilities
need to be researched, especially when considering people with visual disabilities.
Published research on people with hearing disabilities is largely of a qualitative
and interpretive nature. Focusing more on studies of a quantitative nature to determine
the amount of space required in indoor environments for comfortable signing would be
important for future research. Moreover, transportation is a key area to focus on when
considering hearing disabilities. While the d/Deaf community can drive and does not need
to rely on the public transportation system, research needs to study the barriers the d/Deaf
community encounters when using public transportation systems. O’Brien deduced that
the research surrounding the d/Deaf community focuses primarily on the social impacts of
their disability [22], and research is needed to understand and address other key areas of
the built environment to ensure that it is fully accessible.
The quantitative examination of the research on people with visual and hearing im-
pairments, respectively reproduced in Tables 1 and 2, shows the diversity of the population,
research methods, and assistive aids, as well as the low number of people participating in
these studies. The results further indicate that the experimental programs are most likely
biased toward the perceptions of the participants, who are not a representative sample of
the population. This finding is evident in the current standards, which do not address the
diverse needs of people with sensory disabilities. For illustration, 97% of the participants
are people with visual impairments, and 3% represent the d/Deaf community. Moreover,
the research on people with visual disabilities is greatly influenced by the perspective of
sighted individuals, such as authorities, designers, and researchers, who represent 29% of
the participants, according to Figure 2a. Sighted participants, designers, or authorities are
not part of the population and do not necessarily reflect the needs of people with visual
disabilities, as evident in the work of Jeamwatthanachai et al. [45]. Among the 71% of
participants with visual impairment, 46% are identified as having complete blindness and
25% have residual sight or low vision. It should be noted that each group has unique
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
12 of 19
accessibility that needs to be studied separately. For most, if not all, of the case studies, only
one type of sensory disability was investigated with a very small sample size [8,15,30] that
included but did not account for the diverse types of assistive mobility technology [10,31]
as shown in Figure 2b,c. Moreover, the effects of participants’ level of knowledge, previous
experience, satisfaction, perception of safety, or perspectives that might influence the find-
ings were not documented [10,24,25,29,31]. Additionally, there are always concerns with
qualitative research that is of an interpretive nature using a small sample size that is not
statistically representative, where personal judgements of participants can be influenced,
and the questions can be subjective. Lastly, designing and performing any experimental
program where people are the investigated subject poses complex challenges such as ethical
issues, collaboration of people, diverse population, diverse built environment, etc.
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
13 of 19
Table 1. Summary of research papers on visual impairments.
Built Environment
Research Method Tools
Participants
Ref.
Interviews (In Person, Telephone,
or Video Calls)
Seminars/Focus Group
Observed Journeys/
Walking Interviews
Literature/Documents Review
Case Studies
Survey
Statistical Modelling
Authorities, Researchers
and Designers
Visual Impairment
Total Number of Participants
Complete Blindness
Residual Sight/Low Vision
Sighted Guide
White/Long Cane
Guide Dog
White Cane and Guide Dog
Tactile Maps
White/Long Cane
White Cane and Guide Dog
No Mobility Aids
Pedestrian infrastructure
✓
✓
✓
?
3 *
2 *
3
>8
[36]
✓
✓
✓
✓
67
67
[37]
✓
10
4
5
1
5
25
[38]
✓
61
3
12
21 *
97
[39]
✓
21
21
[40]
✓
✓
✓
?
[41]
Outdoor environments
✓
✓
✓
?
12 *
>12
[42]
✓
3 *
4 *
7
[43]
Indoor environments
✓
15
12 *
5 *
1 *
4 *
8 *
45
[45]
* The numbers are deduced based on the results reported in the research studies.
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
14 of 19
Table 2. Summary of research papers on hearing impairments.
Built Environment
Research Method Tools
Total Number of Participants
with Hearing Impairment
Ref.
Interviews (In Person, Telephone,
or Video Calls)
Observed Journeys/
Walking Interviews
Literature/Documents Review
Case Studies
Indoor environments
✓
1
[23]
✓
5
[22]
✓
✓
✓
?
[47]
✓
-
[21]
(a) 
Authorities, 
researchers & 
designers
29%
Complete 
blindness
46%
Residual sight/ 
low vision 
25%
People with 
visual 
impairment
71%
(b) 
9%
80%
5%
3%
3%
Sighted guide
White/ Long cane
Guide dog
White cane & guide dog
Tactile maps
Figure 2. Cont.
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
15 of 19
 
(c) 
41%
1%
58%
White/ Long cane
White cane & guide dog
No mobility aids
Figure 2. Distribution of participants in research studies; (a) relevant to visual impairments, (b) with
complete blindness based on the use of assistive aids, and (c) with residual sight/low vision based
on the use of assistive aids.
5. Conclusions
From the review and analysis of the literature on accessibility of the built environment
for people with sensory disabilities, the following conclusions pertaining to the status of
research are deduced to facilitate the consolidation of efforts and resources of authorities
involved in developing standards:
1.
Statistical analyses of experimental data must account for the population size and
diversity of the population for the findings to be accepted as representative of the
population. Accordingly, for individuals with sensory disabilities, the representative
sample needs to account for the diverse degree of impairment, personal and social
preferences, and assistive aids leading to different needs for their accessibility in every
specific built environment.
2.
Ninety-seven percent of studies investigate the accessibility of the built environment
for people with visual impairments, compared to only 3% for those with hearing im-
pairments. Of significance is the lack of research that considers people with combined
visual and hearing disabilities, or people with sensory and physical disabilities, which
is necessary to ensure that the accessibility features of one group do not adversely
impact the other groups.
3.
Research on people with visual impairments mostly focuses on pedestrian environ-
ments. Research on their accessibility in public transportation and indoor environ-
ments is lacking. Moreover, research should focus on understanding and standardiz-
ing the wayfinding process to help them navigate independently. This involves using
tactile paving, lead lines, and sounds as navigational aids.
4.
Indoor-built environments for people with sensory disabilities pose accessibility
challenges. Providing a space for effective sign language communication for the
d/Deaf community is found to adversely affect the accessibility of people with visual
impairments due to the impact of space size on orientation. Research needs to consider
the physical barriers, such as the width of hallways and pathways, they face in the
built environment and not only the social impact of their disabilities.
5.
Designing and performing experiments on people in general pose complex challenges
such as ethical issues, the collaboration of people, diverse populations, diverse built
environments, etc. The analyses suggest that people with sensory or other disabilities
are reluctant to participate in these research studies. Education, incentives, and a
supportive environment have been shown to enhance participation.
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
16 of 19
In conclusion, the presented analyses and discussions reveal the significance, diversity,
challenges, and importance of having an accessible built environment for people with
sensory disabilities. The quality and representation of research evidence will help reveal
the true barriers and facilitate the transfer of research findings to applications and standards.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.E.C.; formal analysis, M.A.R.; funding acquisition,
S.E.C.; investigation, M.A.R.; methodology, S.E.C.; supervision, S.E.C.; validation, M.A.R. and G.E.M.;
writing—original draft, M.A.R. and G.E.M.; writing—review & editing, S.E.C. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Accessibility Standards Canada—Advancing Accessibility
Standards Research—Project No. 16818569.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: The authors acknowledge the technical feedback from representatives of the
Spinal Cord Injury foundations in Canada, the Neil Squire Society, Accessibility Simplified, CNIB,
Government of Saskatchewan Office of Disability Issues, National Network for Mental Health,
People First of Canada, Rick Hansen Foundation, Sawchuck Accessible Solutions, StopGap, The
Saskatchewan Association for the Rehabilitation of the Brain Injured, and Wavefront Centre for
Communication Accessibility.
Conflicts of Interest: Author G.E. Marjaba was employed by the company Engineers in Motion Inc.
The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Glossary
Term
Explanation
Ref.
Access route
Any route in an internal or external environment, whether it is level, gently
sloped, ramped, or stepped that is available and understandable for a person to
use. In external environments, access routes comprise paths, pavements, and
other pedestrian routes, such as a right of way through a public space.
[60]
Acoustics
Characteristics relating to sound
[60]
Assistive device
Any medical device, mobility aid, communication aid, or other aid that is
specially designed to assist a person with a disability with a need related to
their disability.
[61]
Blister blocks/Blister tactile blocks
A type of tactile attention indicator (TWSI)
[40]
Braille
A system where raised dots are used to represent letters and words. Unified
English Braille (UEB) is the braille standard for Canada.
[62]
Crosswalk
A portion of a pedestrian crossing that is within the vehicular right-of-way.
[62]
Environmental cues
There are other auditory and tactile cues that someone with sight loss can use to
navigate safely. For example, different ground types feel distinct when walking
or sweeping a white cane over them, such as soft grass vs. the hard concrete of
the sidewalk. The sound of voices or music can help someone locate a doorway,
as can a change in temperature (such as a draft of cool air in summer or warm
air in winter from an open door).
[63]
Guide dog
Bred and trained to guide people who are blind around their environment by
avoiding obstacles, indicating hazards, and locating destinations. Working as a
team, these incredible animals give their handlers independence and confidence.
[63]
Landmarks
People who are blind or partially sighted often navigate by landmarks.
Someone may not be able to read the sign for “Baker St.” but will know it as the
street with the tall hedge on the corner. They may not be able to read the house
number, but they know that they want to turn in at the fourth driveway after
the house with the wooden planter boxes.
[63]
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
17 of 19
Term
Explanation
Ref.
Long cane
Used as probes to sweep and scan the environment, detect objects in a person’s
path, changes in the walking surface, and potential hazards like steps and curbs.
[63]
Mobility aid
Any manual or electric wheelchair, scooter, boarding chair, walker, cane, crutch,
prosthesis, or other aid that is specially designed to assist a person with a
disability with a need related to mobility.
[61]
Orientation blocks
A new type of blocks, developed by Inagaki et al., installed at crosswalk
entrances dedicated to indicating direction.
[40]
Pedestrian crossing
The combination of crosswalk segments, curb ramps/blended transitions,
medians, and refuge islands that connect departure and arrival walkways across
a vehicular right-of-way.
[62]
Sighted guide
There are times when people who are blind find guidance from a sighted person
helpful. It is a great way to safely, and respectfully guide someone who is blind.
[63]
Tactile paving surface
A profiled paving or textured surface that provides guidance or warning to
pedestrians with visual difficulties
[60]
Tactile walking surface indicator
A standardized surface, detectable underfoot or by a long white cane, to assist
people with low vision or blindness by alerting or guiding them.
Tactile attention indicator: a TWSI comprising truncated domes that signals a
need for caution at a change in elevation, a vehicular route, train tracks, or other
potential hazard.
Tactile direction indicator: a TWSI that uses flat-topped elongated bars to
facilitate wayfinding in open areas.
Note: ISO 23599 refers to the tactile direction indicator as a “guiding pattern”.
[62]
Wayfinding
A spatial problem-solving process based upon the consistent use and
organization of definite sensory cues in the environment that individuals use to
understand where they are, know where their desired location is, and know
how to reach that destination from their present location.
[62]
White cane
One of the most common tools used by people who are blind to safely navigate
their surroundings. Recognized around the world, it is also an important
identification tool. It is a clear signal to others that the user is a person with
sight loss.
[63]
References
1.
Maple Community Services Types of Sensory Disabilities and Impairment. Available online: https://mapleservices.com.au/
types-of-sensory-disabilities-and-impairment/ (accessed on 23 August 2023).
2.
Abdullah, N.; Low, K.E.Y.; Feng, Q. Sensory Disability. In Encyclopedia of Gerontology and Population Aging; Springer International
Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2021; pp. 4468–4473.
3.
The Canadian National Institute for the Blind Foundation (CNIB). What Is Blindness? Available online: https://www.cnib.ca/
en/sight-loss-info/blindness/what-blindness?region=on (accessed on 23 August 2023).
4.
World Health Organization. World Report on Vision; WHO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2019.
5.
World Health Organization. World Report on Hearing; WHO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2021.
6.
Employment and Social Development Canada. Guidance on the Accessible Canada Regulations: Consulting Persons with Disabilities;
Government of Canada: Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2022.
7.
Sze, N.N.; Christensen, K.M. Access to Urban Transportation System for Individuals with Disabilities. IATSS Res. 2017, 41, 66–73.
[CrossRef]
8.
Rey-Galindo, J.A.; Rizo-Corona, L.; González-Muñoz, E.L.; Aceves-González, C. Environmental Information for People with
Visual Impairment in Mexico—Or What They Need and How They Use It. Appl. Erg. 2020, 85, 103079. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Saha, M.; Fiannaca, A.J.; Kneisel, M.; Cutrell, E.; Morris, M.R. Closing the Gap: Designing for the Last-Few-Meters Wayfinding
Problem for People with Visual Impairments. In Proceedings of the 21st International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on
Computers and Accessibility, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 24 October 2019; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2019; pp. 222–235.
10.
Kirchner, C.E.; Gerber, E.G.; Smith, B.C. Designed to Deter. Community Barriers to Physical Activity for People with Visual or
Motor Impairments. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2008, 34, 349–352. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Soltani, S.H.K.; Sham, M.; Awang, M.; Yaman, R. Accessibility for Disabled in Public Transportation Terminal. Procedia Soc. Behav.
Sci. 2012, 35, 89–96. [CrossRef]
12.
Hashim, A.E.; Samikon, S.A.; Ismail, F.; Kamarudin, H.; Jalil, M.N.M.; Arrif, N.M. Access and Accessibility Audit in Commercial
Complex: Effectiveness in Respect to People with Disabilities (PWDs). Procedia—Soc. Behav. Sci 2012, 50, 452–461. [CrossRef]
13.
Tennøy, A.; Øksenholt, K.V.; Fearnley, N.; Matthews, B. Evaluating Standards and Practices for Facilitating Visually Impaired People’s
Mobility in the Built Environment; Institute of Transport Economics: Oslo, Norway, 2013.
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
18 of 19
14.
Almeida, M.D.X.; Martins, L.B.; Lima, F.J. Analysis of Wayfinding Strategies of Blind People Using Tactile Maps. Procedia Manuf.
2015, 3, 6020–6027. [CrossRef]
15.
Crudden, A. Transportation Issues: Perspectives of Orientation and Mobility Providers. J. Vis. Impair Blind 2015, 109, 457–468.
[CrossRef]
16.
Jeamwatthanachai, W.; Wald, M.; Wills, G. Map Data Representation for Indoor Navigation by Blind People. Int. J. Chaotic Comput.
2016, 4, 70–78. [CrossRef]
17.
Swaine, B.; Labbé, D.; Poldma, T.; Barile, M.; Fichten, C.; Havel, A.; Kehayia, E.; Mazer, B.; McKinley, P.; Rochette, A. Exploring
the Facilitators and Barriers to Shopping Mall Use by Persons with Disabilities and Strategies for Improvements: Perspectives
from Persons with Disabilities, Rehabilitation Professionals and Shopkeepers. Alter 2014, 8, 217–229. [CrossRef]
18.
Perry, M.A.; Devan, H.; Fitzgerald, H.; Han, K.; Liu, L.T.; Rouse, J. Accessibility and Usability of Parks and Playgrounds. Disabil.
Health J. 2018, 11, 221–229. [CrossRef]
19.
Chikuta, O.; du Plessis, E.; Saayman, M. Accessibility Expectations of Tourists with Disabilities in National Parks. Tour. Plan. Dev.
2019, 16, 75–92. [CrossRef]
20.
Tajgardoon, M.; Karimi, H.A. Simulating and Visualizing Sidewalk Accessibility for Wayfinding of People with Disabilities. Int. J.
Cartogr. 2015, 1, 79–93. [CrossRef]
21.
Edwards, C.; Harold, G. DeafSpace and the Principles of Universal Design. Disabil. Rehabil. 2014, 36, 1350–1359. [CrossRef]
22.
O’Brien, D. Negotiating Academic Environments: Using Lefebvre to Conceptualise Deaf Spaces and Disabling/Enabling
Environments. J. Cult. Geogr. 2020, 37, 26–45. [CrossRef]
23.
Pérez Liebergesell, N.; Vermeersch, P.W.; Heylighen, A. Through the Eyes of a Deaf Architect: Reconsidering Conventional
Critiques of Vision-Centered Architecture. Senses Soc. 2019, 14, 46–62. [CrossRef]
24.
Kadir, S.A.; Jamaludin, M. Users’ Satisfaction and Perception on Accessibility of Public Buildings in Putrajaya: Access Audit
Study. Procedia—Soc. Behav. Sci. 2012, 50, 429–441. [CrossRef]
25.
Christensen, K.M.; Blair, M.E.; Holt, J.M. The Built Environment, Evacuations, and Individuals with Disabilities. J. Disabil. Policy
Stud. 2007, 17, 249–254. [CrossRef]
26.
Rovira-Beleta, E.; Cuerva, E.; Pires de Souza, E.; Planas, C.; Alavedra, P. Accessibility of Emergency Evacuation of Persons with
Disabilities in Public Swimming Pools in Barcelona, Spain: A Review of Literature and Regulations. Archit. Eng. Des. Manag.
2015, 11, 475–487. [CrossRef]
27.
Hwang, J.; Li, W.; Stough, L.; Lee, C.; Turnbull, K. A Focus Group Study on the Potential of Autonomous Vehicles as a Viable
Transportation Option: Perspectives from People with Disabilities and Public Transit Agencies. Transp. Res. Part F Traffic Psychol.
Behav. 2020, 70, 260–274. [CrossRef]
28.
Herssens, J.; Heylighen, A. Challenging Architects to Include Haptics in Design: Sensory Paradox between Content and
Representation. In Proceedings of the Designing Together—CAADfutures 2011, Liège, Belgium, 4–8 July 2011.
29.
Haegele, J.A.; Kirk, T.N.; Zhu, X. Self-Efficacy and Physical Activity among Adults with Visual Impairments. Disabil. Health J.
2018, 11, 324–329. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Sharifi, M.S.; Stuart, D.; Christensen, K.; Chen, A. Traffic Flow Characteristics of Heterogeneous Pedestrian Stream Involving
Individuals with Disabilities. Transp. Res. Rec. J. Transp. Res. Board 2015, 2537, 111–125. [CrossRef]
31.
Jenkins, G.; Yuen, H.; Vogtle, L. Experience of Multisensory Environments in Public Space among People with Visual Impairment.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2015, 12, 8644–8657. [CrossRef]
32.
Lewin, S.; Bohren, M.; Rashidian, A.; Munthe-Kaas, H.; Glenton, C.; Colvin, C.J.; Garside, R.; Noyes, J.; Booth, A.; Tunçalp, Ö.;
et al. Applying GRADE-CERQual to Qualitative Evidence Synthesis Findings—Paper 2: How to Make an Overall CERQual
Assessment of Confidence and Create a Summary of Qualitative Findings Table. Implement. Sci. 2018, 13, 10. [CrossRef]
33.
Munthe-Kaas, H.; Bohren, M.A.; Glenton, C.; Lewin, S.; Noyes, J.; Tunçalp, Ö.; Booth, A.; Garside, R.; Colvin, C.J.; Wainwright,
M.; et al. Applying GRADE-CERQual to Qualitative Evidence Synthesis Findings—Paper 3: How to Assess Methodological
Limitations. Implement. Sci. 2018, 13, 25–32. [CrossRef]
34.
Colvin, C.J.; Garside, R.; Wainwright, M.; Munthe-Kaas, H.; Glenton, C.; Bohren, M.A.; Carlsen, B.; Tunçalp, Ö.; Noyes, J.; Booth,
A.; et al. Applying GRADE-CERQual to Qualitative Evidence Synthesis Findings—Paper 4: How to Assess Coherence. Implement.
Sci. 2018, 13, 33–41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Guyatt, G.H.; Oxman, A.D.; Vist, G.; Kunz, R.; Brozek, J.; Alonso-Coello, P.; Montori, V.; Akl, E.A.; Djulbegovic, B.; Falck-Ytter, Y.
GRADE Guidelines: 4. Rating the Quality of Evidence—Study Limitations (Risk of Bias). J. Clin. Epidemiol. 2011, 64, 407–415.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Atkin, R. Sight Line: Designing Better Streets for People with Low Vision; Helen Hamlyn Centre: London, UK, 2010.
37.
Tennøy, A.; Øksenholt, K.V.; Fearnley, N.; Matthews, B. Standards for Usable and Safe Environments for Sight Impaired. Proc.
Inst. Civ. Eng.—Munic. Eng. 2015, 168, 24–31. [CrossRef]
38.
Havik, E.M.; Steyvers, F.J.J.M.; Kooijman, A.C.; Melis-Dankers, B.J.M.; Kooijman, A.C. Accessibility of Shared Space for Visually
Impaired Persons: A Comparative Field Study. Br. J. Vis. Impair. 2015, 33, 96–110. [CrossRef]
39.
Zeng, L. A Survey: Outdoor Mobility Experiences by the Visually Impaired. In Mensch und Computer 2015—Workshopband; De
Gruyter: Berlin, Germany, 2015; pp. 391–398.
40.
Inagaki, T.; Fujisawa, S.; Takahashi, K.; Ikeda, N.; Takeuchi, K.; Ogino, H.; Kobayakawa, S. Experimental Observations on the
Optimal Layout of Orientation Blocks for Safe Road Crossing by the Visually Impaired. IATSS Res. 2017, 41, 82–88. [CrossRef]
Buildings 2024, 14, 707
19 of 19
41.
Bona Frazila, R.; Zukhruf, F. Exploring Physical Attributes of Walkability from Perspective of Blind Pedestrians. MATEC Web
Conf. 2018, 147, 02002. [CrossRef]
42.
Siu, K.W.M. Accessible Park Environments and Facilities for the Visually Impaired. Facilities 2013, 31, 590–609. [CrossRef]
43.
Bandukda, M.; Singh, A.; Berthouze, N.; Holloway, C. Understanding Experiences of Blind Individuals in Outdoor Nature. In
Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Glasgow Scotland,
UK, 2 May 2019; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2019; pp. 1–6.
44.
Jeamwatthanachai, W.; Wald, M.; Wills, G. Building Rating System: An Instrument for Building Accessibility Measurement for
Better Indoor Navigation by Blind People. J. Enabling Technol. 2019, 13, 158–172. [CrossRef]
45.
Jeamwatthanachai, W.; Wald, M.; Wills, G. Indoor Navigation by Blind People: Behaviors and Challenges in Unfamiliar Spaces
and Buildings. Br. J. Vis. Impair. 2019, 37, 140–153. [CrossRef]
46.
Gallaudet University DeafSpace.
Available online: https://gallaudet.edu/campus-design-facilities/campus-design-and-
planning/deafspace/ (accessed on 17 August 2023).
47.
Azalia, N.; Arvanda, E.; Isnaeni, H.; Kusuma, N.R. Proxemic as Spatial Strategy on Social Space for Deaf Community. In
Proceedings of the AIP Conference Proceedings, Penang, Malaysia, 4 May 2020; American Institute of Physics Inc.: College Park,
MD, USA, 2020; Volume 2230, p. 040030. Available online: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/acp/article/2230/1/040030/1002429/
Proxemic-as-spatial-strategy-on-social-space-for (accessed on 3 January 2024).
48.
Hall, E.T. Proxemics. Curr. Anthr. 1968, 9, 83–108. [CrossRef]
49.
National Association of the Deaf Community and Culture. Available online: https://www.nad.org/resources/american-sign-
language/community-and-culture-frequently-asked-questions/ (accessed on 11 December 2023).
50.
Dandona, L.; Dandona, R. Revision of Visual Impairment Definitions in the International Statistical Classification of Diseases.
BMC Med. 2006, 4, 7. [CrossRef]
51.
Fleetwood, D. Sample Size Determination: Definition, Formula, and Example. Available online: https://www.questionpro.com/
blog/determining-sample-size/ (accessed on 10 December 2023).
52.
Cochran, W.G. Sampling Techniques; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 1977.
53.
Fox, S. How to Determine Survey Sample Size: A Guide. Available online: https://survicate.com/blog/survey-sample-size/#:~:
text=Many%20statisticians%20concur%20that%20a,it%20should%20not%20exceed%201000 (accessed on 10 December 2023).
54.
Statistics Canada New Data on Disability in Canada. 2022. Available online: https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/11-627-m/
11-627-m2023063-eng.htm (accessed on 11 December 2023).
55.
The Canadian Association of the Deaf—Association des Sourds du Canada Statistics on Deaf Canadians. Available online:
https://cad-asc.ca/issues-positions/statistics-on-deaf-canadians/ (accessed on 11 December 2023).
56.
Blackwell, D.L.; Lucas, J.W.; Clarke, T.C. Summary Health Statistics for U.S. Adults: National Health Interview Survey. Natl. Cent.
Health Stat. Vital Health Stat. 2012, 10, 1–161.
57.
Lin, F.R.; Niparko, J.K.; Ferrucci, L. Hearing Loss Prevalence in the United States. Arch. Intern Med. 2011, 171, 1851. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
58.
Ackland, P.; Resnikoff, S.; Bourne, R. World Blindness and Visual Impairment: Despite Many Successes, the Problem Is Growing.
Community Eye Health 2017, 30, 71–73. [PubMed]
59.
BALANCE for Blind Adults. BALANCE for Blind Adults Strategic Plan 2016–2020—A Recognized and Connected Rehabilitation
Provider for People Living with Vision Loss in Toronto; BALANCE for Blind Adults: Toronto, ON, Canada, 2016.
60.
The Centre for Excellence in Universal Design (CEUD). Booklet 10—Building Management—Index and Terminology. In Building
for Everyone: A Universal Design Approach; National Disability Authority (NDA): Dublin, Ireland, 2012.
61.
Canadian Transportation Agency. Accessible Transportation—Travelling with Mobility Aids and Other Assistive Devices: A Guide;
Canadian Transportation Agency: Gatineau, QC, Canada, 2020.
62.
CSA/ASC B651:23; Accessible Design for the Built Environment. Canadian Standards Association: Toronto, ON, Canada, 2023.
63.
Canadian National Institute for the Blind (CNIB) Foundation Getting Around. Available online: https://www.cnib.ca/en/
getting-around?region=on (accessed on 23 February 2024).
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
