1254 |  	
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/hsc
Health Soc Care Community. 2022;30:1254–1274.
© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
1  |  INTRODUCTION
Around 15% of the population worldwide, an estimated 1 bil-
lion people, are living with some form of disability (World Health 
Organization,  2011). A disability can either be permanent or 
temporary, with the number of people living with a disability growing 
as the population ages and the prevalence of chronic health conditions 
increase (United Nations Department of Economic & Social Affairs: 
Population Division, 2020; World Health Organization, 2011). The 
experience of disability does not take any one shape; it is diverse, 
Received: 9 August 2021 | Revised: 5 October 2021 | Accepted: 18 November 2021
DOI: 10.1111/hsc.13665  
R E V I E W  A R T I C L E
An overview of systematic reviews to determine the impact 
of socio-­environmental factors on health outcomes of people 
with disabilities
Rebecca J. Mitchell BA (Psych) MA (Psych) MOHS PhD |   Tayhla Ryder BSocSci MRes |   
Katia Matar |   Reidar P. Lystad BChirSc MChiro MPH PhD
 |    
Robyn Clay-­Williams BEng PhD |   Jeffrey Braithwaite BA DipLR MIR MBA PhD
Australian Institute of Health Innovation, 
Macquarie University, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia
Correspondence
Rebecca Mitchell, Australian Institute of 
Health Innovation, Macquarie University, 
Level 6, 75 Talavera Road, Sydney, New 
South Wales 2109, Australia.
Email: r.mitchell@mq.edu.au
Funding information
This research did not receive any specific 
grant from funding agencies in the public, 
commercial or not-­for-­profit sectors.
Abstract
People with disabilities are often subject to intersecting layers of social and economic 
disadvantage and other barriers that drive health inequity. As a result, they frequently 
experience worse health than people without disabilities, beyond the direct effects of 
their health condition or impairment. The aim of this overview of systematic reviews 
was to summarise the evidence on the impact of socio-­environmental factors (i.e. 
social, physical or attitudinal) on the health outcomes of disabled people. A system-
atic search of five databases (MEDLINE, PsycINFO, Embase, CINAHL and Scopus) for 
English-­language articles from January 2000 to April 2021 was conducted. Abstracts 
were screened by two reviewers and reviews were critically appraised. Key data 
were extracted by topic, population, disability type, critical appraisal method, socio-­
environmental themes and health outcomes. There were 23 systematic reviews iden-
tified examining adult (60.9%) or child and young (8.7%) disabled people, with 30.4% 
not specifying an age range. Reviews examined people with neurological or physical 
(39.1%), intellectual (17.4%), sensory (8.7%) or a range of (34.8%) disabilities. Three 
key health outcomes (i.e. access to healthcare, health-­promoting behaviour and care 
quality) and several recurring socio-­environmental themes related to the health out-
comes of disabled people were identified. Disabled people encounter common social, 
physical and attitudinal factors that hinder their health outcomes in terms of access 
to services and quality healthcare. Many preventive health services were identified as 
either inaccessible or not meeting the needs of disabled people. Greater involvement 
of disabled people in service design and awareness raising is essential.
K E Y W O R D S
attitudinal, environment, health outcome, physical, social
    |  1255
MITCHELL et al.
complex and multidimensional (World Health Organization, 2011), 
and a disability can have an impact on a person's needs across the 
health, social and built environment domains.
Difficulties with service provision and accessibility, discrim-
inatory attitudes, socioeconomic disadvantage and social exclu-
sion are widely accepted barriers experienced by disabled people 
that undercut their full participation in society on an equal basis 
to others (Drainoni et al., 2006; Mithen et al., 2015; World Health 
Organization,  2011). Disabled people have reduced opportunities 
for education and work, greater housing insecurity, lower education 
and higher rates of socioeconomic disadvantage than people with-
out disabilities (Kavanagh, 2020; National People with Disabilities & 
Carer Council, 2009). As a result, disabled people, many with unique 
health needs, often experience worse health outcomes than non-­
disabled people (Drainoni et al., 2006; Reichard et al., 2011).
Healthcare services may be underutilised by disabled people 
for a number of reasons. Common barriers to healthcare access and 
provision experienced by people with disabilities are physical barri-
ers due to the inaccessibility of buildings and unadaptable medical 
technology and equipment (da Rosa et al., 2020), poor or unavailable 
healthcare services to suit their needs (Drainoni et al., 2006) and 
healthcare affordability (Merten et al., 2015). Moreover, healthcare 
staff and other service providers may have inadequate knowledge 
and training in caring and working with disabled people (Bowen 
et al., 2020). Negative social attitudes towards disability can influ-
ence healthcare provision and also peer and family relationships with 
a disabled person (Iacono et al., 2014; Lindsay, 2016). Disabled peo-
ple have reported experiencing a lack of knowledge among health 
professionals of medical issues related to disability, poor healthcare 
coordination and insensitive interactions (Drainoni et al., 2006).
Many systematic reviews have been conducted that have ex-
amined different aspects of service accessibility and social inclu-
sion and their impact on health outcomes of disabled people. These 
reviews have largely focused on accessibility issues (such as in the 
home or social environments) (Calder et al., 2018; Cho et al., 2016), 
access and use of clinical preventive services (such as health screen-
ing) (Andresen et al., 2013), poor experiences of healthcare or unmet 
care needs (Gibson & O’Connor, 2010; Iacono et al., 2014) and barri-
ers to service access or participation (Barr et al., 2018; Breckenridge 
et  al.,  2014; Edwards et  al.,  2020; Matin et  al.,  2021). There has 
also been some exploration of perceived negative social attitudes 
of disability and associated experiences of people with disability in 
accessing healthcare (Lawler et al., 2013; Matin et al., 2021). While 
each review targeted a specific area relevant to the health and ser-
vice needs of disabled people, the diversity and multidimensional 
impact on the health outcomes of disabled people are lost when 
each review is considered as a sole entity. The overall objective of 
this research is to identify and summarise the evidence on the im-
pact of social, physical or attitudinal environmental factors on key 
health outcomes for disabled people. This research aims to provide 
an overview of systematic reviews to summarise the evidence on the 
impact of socio-­environmental factors (i.e. social, physical or attitu-
dinal) on the health outcomes of disabled people.
2  |  METHOD
This is an overview of systematic reviews on the impact of socio-­
environmental factors on the health outcomes of disabled people. 
The overview identified systematic reviews that examined social, 
physical or attitudinal factors influencing health outcomes of disa-
bled people and extracted data on the main socio-­environmental 
themes and health outcomes were examined in each review (Pollock 
et al., 2021).
2.1  |  Concepts and definitions
For this review, the guiding definition of disability was that it is the 
product of interactions between people with impairments and con-
textual factors, such as attitudinal or environmental barriers, that 
limit an individual's full and effective participation in society on 
an equal basis with others (United Nations, 2006; World Health 
Organization, 2011, 2021). Impairments may be categorised as phys-
ical, psychological, intellectual or sensory. Disability was not con-
ceptualised as an attribute of particular people, however, the term is 
used throughout this review to describe the population of interest as 
a coherent group. For the purposes of this review, transitory forms 
of disability resulting from injury or illness, where the person expe-
riencing impairment is likely to reoccupy a non-­disabled social role 
and is expected to regain functionality, were excluded.
The Craig Hospital Inventory of Environmental Factors (CHIEF) 
(Craig Hospital Research Department, 2001) was used as a frame-
work to conceptualise socio-­environmental factors that may impact 
on the experiences of disabled people. The constructs in CHIEF have 
strong parallels and overlap with the socio-­environmental factor do-
mains of the International Classification of Functioning, Disability 
and Health (World Health Organization, 2021) and the Centres for 
Disease Control and Prevention's Disability Barriers to Inclusion 
(Centers for Disease Control & Prevention,  2020), however, the 
What is known about the topic?
•	 People with disability often have difficulty accessing 
preventive health services.
•	 Some health professionals have inadequate knowledge 
regarding disability-­focused care.
What this paper adds?
•	 Common socio-­environmental themes across differ-
ent disabilities hindered access to services and quality 
healthcare.
•	 Essential to have involvement of people with disability 
in service design, messaging and awareness raising.
•	 Adoption of universal design principles needed for the 
built environment and medical equipment.
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1256 |   
MITCHELL et al.
CHIEF is able to encompass the breadth of socio-­environmental 
factors. The CHIEF factors include the following: policies (e.g. em-
ployment policies, community service policies), physical or structural 
(e.g. design of community, technology, natural environment), work 
or school (e.g. support and attitudes at work and school), attitude or 
support (e.g. discrimination, support and attitudes in the home) and 
services or assistance (e.g. transportation, education and training, 
help in the community).
Health outcomes included those relating to healthcare utilisation 
and care quality, physical and mental health, health-­related quality 
of life (HRQoL), ability to perform activities of daily living (ADLs), 
and participation in health-­promoting behaviours such as physical 
activity. For the purposes of this overview, outcomes more distally 
related to health, including social determinants of health (such as 
education, employment or housing) were excluded.
2.2  |  Data sources and eligibility criteria
A systematic search was conducted using five databases: MEDLINE, 
PsycINFO, Embase, CINAHL and Scopus. The search strategy was 
developed with a university librarian to include search terms and 
keywords related to three key concepts: (i) disability; (ii) environ-
mental factors and (iii) health outcomes. The base keywords for the 
search were as follows: (i) disabled persons OR amputee OR persons 
with mental disability; (ii) environment OR policy OR workplace OR 
attitude OR social inclusion and (iii) health services OR accessibil-
ity OR healthcare accessibility OR outcome. The exact search string 
was adapted to optimise the search of each database (see Appendix 
S1 for full search strategy). Results were limited to English-­language 
articles that were published in peer-­review journals from 1 January 
2000 to 7 April 2021. Snowballing of references included in the 
reviews was conducted to identify any potential reviews not previ-
ously identified. The BMC Women's Health and the Disability and 
Health Journal were hand-­searched by one reviewer (TR) for any ad-
ditional reviews.
2.3  |  Review screening
The review protocol was registered with PROSPERO International 
Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (ID:CRD42021253149) 
and conducted using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-­Analyses (PRISMA) method. Systematic reviews 
were included if they examined the impact of socio-­environmental 
factor(s) on the health outcome(s) of disabled people. Reviews of 
studies from solely low-­ or middle-­income countries were excluded 
due to general differences in access to healthcare and services com-
pared to high-­income countries (Hashemi et al., 2020; World Health 
Organization, 2011). Reviews were excluded if disabled people were 
not the primary population of interest, if insufficient detail was 
given about the socio-­environmental factor(s) or health outcome(s), 
or if the review primarily related to clinical, behavioural, surgical or 
pharmacological interventions without also locating disability within 
a broader social environmental context (i.e. only considered within 
a biomedical lens) (Wade & Halligan, 2004). Whilst recognising that 
ongoing disability can be acquired through traumatic injury, articles 
which focused on the acute care or adjustment periods following 
injury were excluded.
The results of the database searches and journal hand-­search 
were imported to Endnote X9 and duplicates removed. The ab-
stracts were independently assessed for inclusion by two reviewers 
(TR, KM), who met regularly to discuss uncertainties. If it was clear 
from the abstract that the article was not a systematic review or 
did not examine the impact of socio-­environmental factors on the 
health outcomes of disabled people it was excluded. Both reviewers 
(TR, KM) screened 10% of the articles and interrater reliability was 
>94% agreement. Any disagreement on abstracts were discussed 
and 100% consensus achieved.
2.4  |  Data extraction and quality review
If an article was not excluded in the abstract review stage, the full 
text of each included review was assessed by two reviewers (TR, 
KM) and then appraised by a third reviewer (RM). Where available, 
key information extracted included: authors and publication year; 
review objective/aim; topic, characteristics of included studies, 
population characteristics, type of disability, socio-­environmental 
factors, health outcomes, critical appraisal tool used and summary 
findings. The methodological quality of reviews was assessed by two 
reviewers (TR, KM) using the Joanna Brigg's Institute's (JBI’s) critical 
appraisal checklist for systematic reviews and research syntheses 
(The Joanna Briggs Institute, 2017). Reviews were rated as low-­ (<5 
items), mid-­ (6–­8 items) or high-­ (>9 items) quality according to the 
number of checklist items fulfilled. Reviews were not excluded on 
the basis of quality appraisal. However, the low-­quality reviews did 
not contribute evidence that was not elsewhere supported by a re-
view with a higher quality review.
2.5  |  Data synthesis
The key characteristics of included reviews were extracted and 
tabulated. The socio-­environmental factors examined and de-
scribed in the results and discussion sections of included reviews 
that were indicated to influence and/or have an impact on health 
outcomes of people with disabilities were categorised based on 
CHIEF themes (Craig Hospital Research Department, 2001) by two 
reviewers (TR, KM) and then appraised by a third reviewer (RM). 
Two reviewers (TR, KM) undertook an inductive, iterative process 
to categorise the socio-­environmental factors using the CHIEF 
(Craig Hospital Research Department,  2001). Influencing factors 
were initially identified in each review article (e.g. absence of per-
sonal assistive devices) and then classified into broad high-­level 
themes (e.g. services—­personal equipment) to describe the breadth 
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    |  1257
MITCHELL et al.
of socio-­environmental factors identified for the health-­related 
outcomes examined (Table 1). Multiple health outcomes and socio-­
environmental themes and sub-­themes could be identified in each 
review.
3  |  RESULTS
There were 614 potentially eligible systematic review articles identi-
fied after removing duplicates. Most articles were excluded at the 
abstract screening stage (n = 580; 94.5%). Thirty-­four full-­text ar-
ticles were assessed and, of these, 11 (32.3%) were excluded after 
full-­text review. There were 23 reviews that met all study criteria 
and were included in the synthesis (Figure 1).
Of the 23 included reviews, 14 (60.9%) were focused exclusively 
on adult populations, two (8.7%) reviews looked exclusively at chil-
dren and/or young people and seven (30.4%) did not specify an age 
range. Seven (30.4%) reviews specifically focused on women with 
disabilities. In terms of type of disability, nine (39.1%) reviews focused 
on people with neurological or physical disabilities, four (17.4%) ex-
clusively looked at learning, intellectual or developmental disabili-
ties, two (8.7%) solely focused on people with sensory disabilities 
(i.e. visual or hearing impairment) and eight (34.8%) reviews did not 
specify the type(s) of disability examined. The included reviews ex-
amined a range of health outcomes, including access and utilisation 
of health services (n = 13) (including oral health, audiology, oncology 
and maternal and infant health), participation in health behaviours 
(n = 8) (including diabetes self-­care, menstrual hygiene management 
TA B LE 1 Environmental factor theme conceptual definitions
CHIEF theme
Sub-­theme
Conceptual definition
Policies
Policy—­government
Refers to government policies and guidelines for service provision, 
government funding for social services and healthcare. Includes 
accessibility legislation.
Policy—­financial
Refers to private health insurance policies and eligibility for coverage, 
out-­of-­pocket expenses for healthcare, cost of participating in 
programs.
Policy—­organisation
Refers to the policies and rules of organisations and businesses, e.g. 
appointment scheduling, eligibility criteria for services, training 
requirements for staff.
Physical or structural
Physical—­environment
Refers to the natural and built environment, particularly relating to 
public spaces and amenities, e.g. footpaths, parking spaces, building 
entryways.
Physical—­facility/equipment
Refers to the design and accessibility or adaptability of particular 
facilities and machines, devices, technology within facilities, e.g. 
exercise equipment, scanning machines.
Services or assistance
Services—­available programs/services
Refers to the absence or presence of programs (e.g. parenting courses, 
fitness classes) or services (e.g. allied healthcare, audiology). Also 
includes the availability of trained staff and specialists in the local 
area.
Services—­information provision/
communication
Refers to the availability and provision of information in an accessible 
format, and interpersonal communication that accommodates 
differences in how people receive messages and express themselves. 
Also includes language style, i.e. sentence complexity, jargon and 
technical terms.
Services—­transport
Refers to availability, affordability, accessibility of public or private 
transportation. Including the routes and distance of transportation 
stops (e.g. bus stops, train stations) to services.
Services—­personal equipment
Refers to personal equipment, products or devices, such as adapted 
insulin monitoring devices and sports wheelchairs. Includes the 
affordability and acceptability of the product.
Attitude or support
Attitudes and support—­providers, 
community, family
Refers to the attitudes, support and encouragement given to people 
with disabilities from family and peers, the community, service 
providers and healthcare professionals. Also includes stereotyping, 
stigma and discrimination.
Knowledge/training—­providers
Refers to the knowledge and awareness held by service providers 
and professionals, including healthcare workers, of how to engage 
appropriately with people with disabilities. The availability of 
evidence to inform care for people with disabilities. Training in 
working and communicating with people with disabilities (and carers).
Abbreviation: CHIEF, Craig Hospital Inventory of Environmental Factors.
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1258 |   
MITCHELL et al.
and physical activity) and the experience and quality of care in 
acute care settings (n = 6) (Table 2). Most reviews were assessed 
to be of high-­ (n = 16; 69.6%) or mid-­ (n = 6; 26.1%) quality. Only six 
(26.1%) reviews assessed the likelihood of publication bias (Table 3). 
Illustrative quotations from reviews for socio-­environmental themes 
and sub-­themes are shown in Table 4.
The two most frequent reoccurring socio-­environmental themes 
identified that influenced or had an impact on access to healthcare 
of disabled people were knowledge and training of providers (n = 9) 
and the physical design of facilities and equipment (n  =  9). Care 
quality of disabled people was most frequently influenced by infor-
mation provision and communication (n = 4) and health-­promoting 
behaviours of disabled people was frequently influenced by avail-
able programs (n = 5), knowledge and training of providers (n = 4), 
the physical design of facilities and equipment (n = 4) and the trans-
portation services (n = 4) socio-­environmental themes (Figure 2).
4  |  DISCUSSION
This overview of systematic reviews sought to collate and summarise 
the evidence on the impact of social, physical or attitudinal environ-
mental factors on a number of key health outcomes for disabled peo-
ple. It identified several common recurring CHIEF socio-­environmental 
themes and sub-­theme from the reviews that were identified as hav-
ing an impact on health outcomes (i.e. access to healthcare, health-­
promoting behaviours and care quality) of disabled people.
4.1  |  Knowledge, training and attitudes of 
providers, family and carers
Several reviews described the poor experience and quality 
of healthcare received by disabled people in clinical settings, 
largely attributed to care providers’ lack of training in providing 
disability-­focused care and unwillingness or confidence to adapt 
existing models of care (Bradbury-­Jones et al., 2013; Breckenridge 
et  al.,  2014; da Rosa et  al.,  2020; Edwards et  al.,  2020; Gibson 
& O’Connor,  2010; Heideveld-­Gerritsen et  al.,  2021; Lawler 
et al., 2013; Marrocco & Krouse, 2017; Matin et al., 2021). In some 
situations, healthcare providers may feel anxious and ill-­equipped 
to provide care to disabled people with complex care needs who 
may also have communication barriers, thus contributing to poor 
experiences of healthcare by disabled people (Bradbury-­Jones 
et  al.,  2013; Marrocco & Krouse,  2017). Moreover, it appears 
there is a lack of evidence-­based care guidelines for people with 
disabilities (Homeyard et al., 2016). As a consequence of the lack 
of evidence, practitioners rely on protocols devised for people 
without disability, such as protocols for maternal care for women 
(Homeyard et  al.,  2016; Lawler et  al.,  2013; Matin et  al.,  2021). 
Ensuring that care protocols include information on how care plans 
can be adapted for people with a range of disabilities may go some 
way to providing healthcare providers with information on how 
best to deliver disability-­focused care.
At the same time, the beliefs of healthcare professionals, ed-
ucators and the wider community are influenced by prevailing 
FI G U R E 1 PRISMA flow diagram 
Records idenﬁed through 
database searching 
(n=726) 
Screening 
Included 
Eligibility 
Idenﬁcaon 
Addional records idenﬁed 
through other sources 
(n=11) 
Records aer duplicates removed 
(n=614) 
Records screened 
(n=614) 
Records excluded 
(n=580) 
Full-text arcles assessed 
for eligibility 
(n=34) 
Full-text arcles excluded, 
with reasons 
(n = 11) 
- 
Not focused on 
disabled people (n=1) 
- 
Not high-income 
context (n=1) 
- 
No health outcome 
(n=3) 
- 
No environmental 
factors (n=2) 
- 
Not a systemac 
review (n=4) 
Studies included in 
synthesis  
(n=23) 
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    |  1259
MITCHELL et al.
social attitudes that often devalue people with disabilities. Several 
reviews drew attention to the experiences of disabled people 
(women in particular) feeling unsafe, being left unattended and 
feeling disrespected in healthcare settings, and the perception 
of health professionals as unwilling to accommodate diversity 
(Lawler et  al.,  2013; Matin et  al.,  2021). Concerningly, two re-
views highlighted that healthcare and other professionals disre-
garded the preferences and input of disabled people and their 
carers (Bradbury-­Jones et al., 2013; Horner-­Johnson et al., 2019). 
Providers’ misconceptions about the needs and priorities of dis-
abled people have also determined whether disabled individuals 
were referred to, or gained access to, services and treatments 
such as cancer screening and contraceptives (Breckenridge 
et al., 2014; Edwards et al., 2020; Horner-­Johnson et al., 2019). 
Some care tasks, such as menstrual care, were identified as being 
disliked by professional carers, with limited support also provided 
to families and the person with a disability on how to manage 
menstrual hygiene (Wilbur et al., 2019). It appears there are likely 
to be opportunities to redress social attitudes, perceptions and 
training of care providers in how to work and care for people with 
disabilities, such as through induction training or ongoing profes-
sional development (Pelleboer-­Gunnink et al., 2017; Satchidanand 
et al., 2012).
Three reviews acknowledged the importance of considering 
multiple marginalisation due to the intersectionality between 
disability and other minority identities (Barr et  al.,  2018; Lawler 
et al., 2013; Trounson et al., 2020). Societal marginal groups, such 
as stemming from cultural or linguistic differences, can further 
have an impact on health outcomes for disabled people. In ad-
dition to disability-­related barriers, there are both language and 
cultural barriers to accessing healthcare for Indigenous people 
(Barr et  al.,  2018), people in minority ethnic groups (Robertson 
et al., 2019), and among lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, inter-
sex or questioning people with a disability (Wilson et al., 2018). 
Greater involvement of consumers with a disability, including 
those in further marginalised groups, in service design and pro-
viding cultural competency awareness for healthcare providers 
(Olaussen & Renzaho,  2016; Trounson et  al.,  2020) are two po-
tential strategies to reduce service and care inequalities (Beverley 
et al., 2004; Trounson et al., 2020).
The role that carers and supporters play in assisting people 
with disabilities, accommodating their role within healthcare 
spaces and providing practical support was acknowledged in the 
reviews. However, two support mechanisms of carer training and 
the importance of the availability of respite care were viewed as 
additional strategies that could positively impact the health and 
wellbeing of disabled people (Bradbury-­Jones et al., 2013; Wilbur 
et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020). Two reviews flagged that opportu-
nities for increasing awareness among family members and carers 
of the need to provide support to the disabled person in overcom-
ing barriers (e.g. transportation, informational) to service access 
and participation were required (Bloemen et al., 2015; Bodde & 
Seo, 2009).
4.2  |  Physical environment, facilities, equipment
The physical environment can pose barriers to accessing the space 
where health services are provided. People with neurological and 
physical disabilities were commonly the focus of reviews which con-
sidered the impact of the built environment on the use of health ser-
vices, especially preventive health services and screening (Edwards 
et al., 2020; Lawler et al., 2013; Marrocco & Krouse, 2017). Despite 
the existence of universal design principles, examples of inaccessibil-
ity in the built environmental included narrow doorways, doors with-
out a push button for automatic opening, impaired access to toilet 
facilities, lack of ramps at entranceways and a lack of disabled park-
ing spaces (Breckenridge et al., 2014; da Rosa et al., 2020; Edwards 
et al., 2020; Heideveld-­Gerritsen et al., 2021; Lawler et al., 2013). 
Barriers in the built environment were common across facilities 
(Bloemen et al., 2015; Eisenberg et al., 2017). At recreational facili-
ties, for instance there may be no place to leave a wheelchair close 
to exercise equipment, or no access seat or hoist (or staff suffi-
ciently trained) to enter a swimming pool (Martin Ginis et al., 2016; 
Newitt et al., 2016). Such barriers can discourage, if not make en-
tirely unavailable, the use of facilities for physical activity by disabled 
people. In public spaces, design features such as footpaths, lighting 
and street density may encourage leisure-­time physical activity and 
social participation (Eisenberg et al., 2017). Ensuring that universal 
design principles are adopted and accessibility issues are considered 
and addressed when designing and building healthcare facilities will 
enable these facilities to be physically accessible by all individuals.
The absence of adjustable equipment and devices can make it 
difficult for disabled people to undergo preventive health screen-
ing and examinations safely and comfortably. For instance three re-
views noted that mammography machines are typically designed to 
be used while a person is standing upright and may not be adjustable 
to a lower height (Edwards et al., 2020; Gibson & O’Connor, 2010; 
Marrocco & Krouse,  2017). These obstacles may render services 
totally inaccessible, unable to be accessed without assistance or 
prior planning, or may be so burdensome and undignifying to use 
that disabled people are excluded or deterred from their utilisation 
(Marrocco & Krouse, 2017; Matin et al., 2021). In fact, it has been es-
timated that disabled people only receive around 35%–­40% of rec-
ommended preventive health services (Marrocco & Krouse, 2017). 
Equipment that adapts processes to suit the needs of disabled 
people, such as an adaptive wheelchair that enables participation 
in sport, can facilitate participation by disabled people (Bloemen 
et  al.,  2015). However, there can be difficulties (such as cost) as-
sociated with obtaining adaptive equipment or assistive devices for 
personal use (Bloemen et  al.,  2015; Mulligan et  al.,  2012; Newitt 
et al., 2016).
4.3  |  Transport and service or program availability
Across the reviews, and regardless of impairment, transporta-
tion was commonly identified as a key factor influencing a disabled 
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1260 |   
MITCHELL et al.
TA B LE 2 Characteristics of the systematic reviews examining the impact of environmental factors on health outcomes of disabled people
Authors
Review aim
Studies
Population
Disability
Barr et al. (2018)
Evaluate literature on service 
provision to children with 
hearing loss living in regional, 
rural, remote Australia
28 studies: 24 qualitative 
or quantitative, 3 quasi-­
experimental, 1 narrative 
review
Children ≤16 years
Sensory disability
Beverley et al. (2004)
Identify health information needs 
of visually impaired people 
and highlight major gaps in the 
literature
16 studies: 5 qualitative, 5 
quantitative, 5 mixed 
method, 1 seminar
Visually impaired 
people, all ages
Sensory disability
Bloemen et al. (2015)
Summarise important factors 
associated with participation 
in physical activity in children 
and adolescents with physical 
disabilities
18 studies: 12 quantitative, 6 
qualitative
Children and young 
people, >4 and 
≤18 years
Neurological or  
physical disabilities
Bodde and Seo (2009)
Determine what environmental and 
social barriers prevent adults 
with intellectual disabilities from 
engaging in physical activity
7 studies: 5 qualitative, 
1 quantitative, 1 
mixed-­method
Adults ≥18 years
Intellectual or  
learning disability
Bradbury-­Jones 
et al. (2013)
Identifying influences on the health, 
safety and welfare of adults 
with learning disabilities in acute 
hospitals.
7 studies: all qualitative
Adults, age unspecified
Intellectual or  
learning disability
Breckenridge 
et al. (2014)
Explored how domestic abuse 
impacts on disabled women's 
access to maternity care
11 studies: 8 quantitative, 1 
qualitative, 2 mixed method
Young people and 
adults (women 
≥16 years)
Non-­specific disability
Da Rosa et al. (2020)
Identify barriers (and facilitators) of 
access to oral health services for 
disabled people
16 studies: all quantitative
Non-­specific
Non-­specific disability
Edwards et al. (2020)
Identify the barriers (and facilitators) 
of access to cancer services for 
physically disabled adults and 
their experiences of cancer care
17 studies: 10 qualitative, 7 
quantitative
Adults ≥18 years
Physical disability
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    |  1261
MITCHELL et al.
Environmental factor themes 
identified
Health outcome 
examined
Quality assessment tool 
used
Author conclusions
Services (transport; 
information provision/
communication; available 
programs)
Access to 
healthcare—­
specialised 
health 
services
John Hopkins Evidence-­
based rating scale for 
strength and quality of 
evidence Newhouse 
et al. (2007)
Children with hearing loss living in regional, rural and remote 
Australia experience reduced quality and frequency of 
audiology services.
Physical (environment)
Services (information 
provision/communication)
Access to 
healthcare—­
accessibility 
of health 
information
Critical Skills Training in 
Appraisal for Librarians 
checklist Booth and 
Brice (2001)
Informational needs included information on health promotion, 
visual impairment in general, coping with visual impairment 
or accessing health services. Information gaps included 
need for diverse information and involvement of visually 
impaired people.
Physical (facility/equipment)
Attitudes (providers and 
peers)
Services (available programs)
Health promoting 
behaviour—­
physical 
activity 
participation
McMaster Critical Review 
Forms (Law et al. (1998)
and Letts et al. (2007)
Factors associated with participation in physical activity 
included personal (e.g. physical fitness, self-­efficacy, 
motivation, age, time) and environmental (e.g. social 
support, socialisation, availability of equipment, availability 
of local facilities).
Policy (organisation; financial)
Attitudes (providers and 
family)
Services (transport; available 
programs)
Health-­
promoting 
behaviour—­
physical 
activity 
participation
Hierarchy of evidence for 
assessing qualitative 
health research Daly 
et al. (2007) and Russell 
and Gregory (2003)
Common barriers identified were transportation issues, 
financial limitations, lack of awareness of options, lack of 
support from caregivers and authority figures (i.e. parent, 
teacher, coach), lack of clear policies for engaging in regular 
physical activity in residential and day service programs.
Policy (financial)
Physical (facility/equipment)
Attitudes (providers)
Services (information 
provision/communication)
Knowledge/training 
(providers)
Care quality—­
hospital 
setting
A global assessment of 
study quality Walsh and 
Downe (2006)
Six key areas of influence identified: care provision (meeting 
health and personal needs), communication, staff attitudes, 
staff knowledge, supporters, carers (valuing their role) and 
physical environment.
Policy (organisation; financial)
Physical (environment; 
facility/equipment)
Attitudes and support 
(providers and community)
Services (transport; available 
programs)
Knowledge/training 
(providers)
Access to 
healthcare—­
maternal and 
infant health
Critical Appraisal Skills 
Programme (CASP) 
Cohort Study Checklist 
Critical Appraisal Skills 
Programme (2018a) and 
a global assessment of 
study quality Walsh and 
Downe (2006)
Found that a mental health diagnosis, poor relationships 
with health professionals and environmental barriers (i.e. 
physical, geographical and institutional) can compromise 
use of maternity services.
Policy (financial)
Physical (facility/equipment)
Services (transport)
Knowledge/training 
(providers)
Access to 
healthcare—­
oral health
Downs and Black scale for 
study quality Downs 
and Black (1998) and 
adapted Cochrane 
Collaboration tool for 
risk of bias Higgins 
et al. (2011)
Barriers identified were dentist's lack of preparation for 
disabled people, treatment cost, physical access barriers to 
dentist's facilities, communication difficulties and lack of 
awareness of the need for dental treatment.
None of the studies discussed facilitators.
Policy (financial; organisation)
Physical (facility/equipment)
Attitudes (providers)
Services (transport; 
information provision/
communication)
Knowledge/training 
(providers)
Access to 
healthcare—­
preventive, 
cancer 
screening
Mixed Methods Appraisal
Tool (MMAT-­Version 11) 
Pace et al. (2012)
Various barriers identified including not engaging in preventive 
health behaviour (e.g. limited knowledge of preventive 
healthcare, time constraints), negative interactions with 
health professionals (e.g. poor attitude or behaviour, lack 
of knowledge about disabilities), external factors (e.g. cost, 
transport), accessibility of facilities and equipment (e.g. physical 
access and parking, adaptive equipment), physical positioning 
concerns (e.g. need for physical support, pain and discomfort).
Practical facilitators that could improve screening were 
disabled parking spaces, handrails by entrance, level or 
ramped entrances, accessibility buttons on doors, adaptive 
equipment in the clinic, assistance to get around buildings/
undress for screening, a provider who understands 
disability, having additional time in the appointment.
(Continues)
(Continues)
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1262 |   
MITCHELL et al.
Authors
Review aim
Studies
Population
Disability
Eisenberg et al. (2017)
Whether built environment factors 
moderate the association 
between having a disability and 
lower levels of physical activity
15 studies: 9 quantitative, 6 
qualitative
Adults ≥18 years
Physical, sensory or  
intellectual disability
Gibson and O’Connor 
(2010)
Determine if disability limits access to 
healthcare and identify what body 
functions, structures and activities 
and participation, as well as 
contextual factors (environment 
and personal) interact with the 
health condition to limit access
60 studies: 27 database studies 
(unspecified further), 20 
quantitative, 13 qualitative
Children and adults, 
age unspecified
Non-­specific disability
Heideveld-­Gerritsen 
et al. (2021)
Identify and provide an overview of 
maternity care experiences of 
physically disabled women
10 studies: 9 qualitative, 1 
mixed method
Adults (women, age 
unspecified)
Physical, including  
sensory disability
Homeyard et al. (2016)
Identify and review the existing 
evidence on the provision of 
antenatal care among women 
with an intellectual disabilities
16 studies: 9 qualitative, 5 
quantitative, 2 mixed 
method
Adults (women, age 
unspecified)
Intellectual or  
learning disability
Horner-­Johnson 
et al. (2019)
Identify contraceptive knowledge, 
attitudes and preferences 
regarding contraception, 
contraceptive use, barriers 
(and facilitators) to informed 
contraceptive use and 
effectiveness of interventions to 
improve informed contraceptive 
decision-­making and use.
54 studies: 48 observational, 6 
interventional (unspecified 
further)
Adults (women of 
reproductive age)
Non-­specific disability
Lawler et al. (2013)
Identify challenges (and facilitators) 
to accessing maternity services 
experienced by women with 
a physical disability during 
pregnancy, childbirth and early 
motherhood
28 studies: 18 qualitative, 
9 quantitative, 1 mixed 
method
Adults (women, age 
unspecified)
Physical disability
TA B LE 2 (Continued)
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    |  1263
MITCHELL et al.
(Continues)
Environmental factor themes 
identified
Health outcome 
examined
Quality assessment tool 
used
Author conclusions
Physical (environment)
Health promoting 
behaviour—­
physical 
activity 
participation
CASP Qualitative Checklist 
Critical Appraisal Skills 
Programme (2018b) and 
the Community Guide 
to Preventative Services 
Data Abstraction 
Form (Part III) Zaza 
et al. (2000)
Built environment barriers identified were physical (e.g. safety, 
inadequate lighting, uneven sidewalks, barriers on paths), 
temporal (e.g. maintenance, pedestrian crossing timing) and 
behaviour of other people (e.g. crowded sidewalks).
Policy (financial)
Physical (facility/equipment)
Attitudes (providers)
Services (transport)
Knowledge/training 
(providers)
Access to 
healthcare
Rating method from the 
UK National Service 
Framework for Long-­term 
Conditions Department 
of Health Long-­Term 
Conditions NSF 
Team (2005)
Found that access to health services was limited by 
impairment and activity limitations (e.g. mobility, cognition, 
communication), contextual factors (e.g. cost, transport, 
physical barriers, clinician's attitudes, personal factors, 
such as age, socioeconomic status, caregiver health).
Physical (facility/equipment)
Attitudes and support 
(providers)
Knowledge/training 
(providers)
Access to 
healthcare;
Care quality—­
maternal and 
infant health
CASP Qualitative Checklist 
Critical Appraisal Skills 
Programme (2018b)
Barriers identified included accessibility of facilities, lack of 
adapted equipment, lack of healthcare provider knowledge 
of physical disability and pregnancy, healthcare provider's 
dismissals of concerns and unwillingness to assist, disabled 
women's feelings of being dehumanised, afraid and vulnerable.
Policy (organisation)
Attitudes and support 
(providers and community)
Services (information 
provision/communication)
Knowledge/training (providers)
Access to 
healthcare;
Care quality—­
maternal and 
infant health
Quality Appraisal 
Framework Caldwell 
et al. (2011)
Four broad themes were identified ‘in the family way’ (i.e. 
physical changes, suitability as a mother), knowledge and 
advocacy (i.e. communication, decision-­making), midwives 
educational needs (i.e. lack of knowledge of women 
with intellectual disability and pregnancy) and midwives 
attitudes (i.e. ability to manage taking care of child).
Physical (facility/equipment)
Attitudes (providers)
Services (information 
provision/communication)
Access to 
healthcare—­
accessibility 
of health 
information
Risk of bias for 
observational studies 
with Newcastle-­
Ottawa scale Wells 
et al. (2000), CASP 
Qualitative Checklist 
Critical Appraisal Skills 
Programme (2018b) and 
Quality Assessment 
Tool for Quantitative 
studies Effective 
Public Health Practice 
Project (2018)
Barriers to contraceptive knowledge, services or informed 
decision-­making were limited access to plain-­language 
information, limited knowledge and negative attitudes by 
health professionals, denied care because of disability, 
physically inaccessible clinics and exam tables and disabled 
person not involved in decision-­making.
Policy (organisation)
Physical (environment; 
facility/equipment)
Attitudes (providers)
Services (information 
provision/communication)
Knowledge/training 
(providers)
Access to 
healthcare;
Care quality—­
maternal and 
infant health
None specified
Barriers to service access included accessibility (e.g. physical 
location, non-­flexible model of care, lack of transportation, 
physical access within facilities, lack of suitable equipment, 
fragmented and uncoordinated care), health professional's 
adaption to needs (e.g. lack of suitable health and parental 
education information) and acceptability (e.g. poor health 
professional knowledge of disability and negative attitudes).
Facilitators to accessing services included improvements in the 
physical environment (e.g. facilities should adopt universal 
design principles, improving physical access to facilities, 
disabled parking, all amenities within reach), improvements 
in service provision (e.g. a disability advisor at the facility, 
services near residence (e.g. community-­based), flexible care 
provision), information access (e.g. information in appropriate 
format that can be easily understood and is culturally 
sensitive), improve acceptability (e.g. disability awareness and 
training programs for health professionals, safe handling and 
transfer of women with a physical disability, early referral to 
allied health professionals for individual needs assessment).
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1264 |   
MITCHELL et al.
Authors
Review aim
Studies
Population
Disability
Malli et al. (2018)
Understand the impact of austerity 
policy on the lives of people with 
learning disabilities and effects 
on people who support them
11 studies: all qualitative
Children and adults, 
age unspecified
Intellectual or  
learning disability
Marrocco and Krouse 
(2017)
Understand the unique obstacles 
that persons with disabilities 
face in accessing preventive 
healthcare services
23 studies: 13 quantitative, 10 
qualitative
Adults ≥18 years
Non-­specific disability
Martin Ginis 
et al. (2016)
Identify barriers (and facilitators) 
to leisure-­time physical activity 
participation among people with 
physical disabilities in review 
articles
22 studies: 13 systematic 
reviews, 9 other reviews 
(e.g. clinical guidelines, 
discussion or opinion pieces)
Children and adults, 
age unspecified
Neurological or  
physical disability
Matin et al. (2021)
Review barriers in access to 
healthcare services for women 
with disabilities
24 studies: all qualitative
Adults (women 
>18 years)
Physical, sensory  
and intellectual  
disability
Mulligan et al. (2012)
Assess environmental and personal 
barriers of physical activity 
participation in populations 
with long term neurological 
conditions
28 studies: 21 quantitative, 7 
qualitative
Adults ≥18 years
Long-­term  
neurological  
disability  
(≥6 months)
Newitt et al. (2016)
Describe factors that influence 
participation in physical 
activity for people with 
neuromusculoskeletal (NMS) 
conditions
15 studies: all qualitative
Adults ≥18 years
Physical disabilities
TA B LE 2 (Continued)
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    |  1265
MITCHELL et al.
Environmental factor themes 
identified
Health outcome 
examined
Quality assessment tool 
used
Author conclusions
Policy (government; financial)
Care quality—­
personal care, 
activities of 
daily life
CASP Systematic Review 
Checklist Critical 
Appraisal Skills 
Programme (2018c)
Found that economic austerity measures were not aligned 
with supporting the care needs of people with learning 
disabilities and that financial cuts had adversely affected 
people with learning disabilities (e.g. social isolation) and 
their informal carers (e.g. increased demand on family 
carer's time, less labour market participation).
Policy (financial)
Physical (environment; 
facility/equipment)
Attitudes (providers)
Services (transport)
Knowledge/training 
(providers)
Access to 
healthcare—­
preventive
None specified
Barriers identified included the physical environment (e.g. 
inadequate ramps, parking, examination space), diagnostic 
equipment issues (e.g. suitability of mammogram 
equipment for wheelchair-­users), transportation 
challenges, lack of provider knowledge about disability and 
poor care coordination, negative provider attitudes and 
financial issues.
Policy (government; 
organisation; financial)
Physical (environment; 
facility/equipment)
Attitudes and support 
(providers and community)
Services (transport; available 
programs)
Knowledge/training 
(providers)
Health-­
promoting 
behaviour—­
physical 
activity 
participation
A Measurement Tool to 
Assess Systematic 
Reviews (AMSTAR) Shea 
et al. (2009)
Barriers identified were intrapersonal (i.e. psychological e.g. 
negative attitudes and beliefs, body functions and structures 
e.g. pain, fatigue and employment status), interpersonal 
(i.e. lack of social support, negative attitudes of others and 
social pressures) and institutional (i.e. lack of disability-­
specific knowledge of people in facilities, poor rehabilitation 
processes, building design and construction and programme 
factors e.g. availability and enjoyable activities).
Specific facilitators identified included positive attitudes and 
beliefs about being active and oneself.
Policy (financial)
Physical (environment; facility/
equipment)
Attitudes and support 
(providers and family)
Services (transport; 
information provision/
communication)
Knowledge/training (providers)
Access to 
healthcare
Consolidated Criteria for 
Reporting Qualitative 
Research O’Brien 
et al. (2014) and Tong 
et al. (2007)
Barriers identified included sociocultural (e.g. erroneous 
assumptions, negative attitudes, low health literacy), 
financial (e.g. unemployment, poverty, high transportation 
costs) and structural (e.g. lack of health insurance, 
inaccessible equipment, lack of knowledge of healthcare 
staff of disability, communication problems).
Physical (facility/equipment)
Attitudes and support 
(providers and community)
Services (transport; available 
programs; information 
provision/communication)
Knowledge/training 
(providers)
Health-­
promoting 
behaviour—­
physical 
activity 
participation
Qualitative Appraisal 
Tool Checklist for 
interviews and focus 
groups Attree (2004) 
and Attree and 
Milton (2006) and 
Joanna Briggs Institute 
(JBI) Assessment for 
Descriptive Studies
Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) 
(2020)
Barriers included activity and participation (e.g. limited 
mobilisation, assistance with activities of daily living, 
embarrassment), physical environmental (e.g. available, 
accessible, affordable transport, cost of program or 
facility access, difficulty accessing assistance within 
facilities due to physical layout, lack of information about 
programs, lack of suitable programs, difficulty obtaining 
specialised exercise equipment), social environment (e.g. no 
expectation to be physically active, lack of knowledge of 
staff regarding requirements of disabled people to support 
participation), personal (e.g. age and unemployment).
Policy (organisation; financial)
Physical (environment; 
facility/equipment)
Attitudes and support 
(providers and community)
Services (available programs; 
transport)
Knowledge/training 
(providers)
Health promoting 
behaviour—­
physical 
activity 
participation
McMaster Critical Review 
Forms Law et al. (1998) 
and Letts et al. (2007)
Barriers identified were body functioning (e.g. fluctuating 
symptoms, fatigue, muscle weakness, pain, depression, 
fear of injury, balance, stability, communication difficulties), 
environmental (e.g. inaccessible buildings and pools, long 
travel distances to accessible facilities, no rest places or rails 
to hang onto near equipment, financial cost, lack of health 
professional knowledge of disability, negative societal 
attitudes), personal (e.g. lack of motivation, self-­conscious, 
embarrassed, uncomfortable in new environment).
Motivators to participate were categorised as body 
functioning (e.g. maintain independence and function, 
weight control), environmental (e.g. social support, safety 
devices present and assistance from health professionals), 
personal (e.g. goal setting and achieving, enjoyment, 
feelings of accomplishment).
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1266 |   
MITCHELL et al.
person's access to health services (Edwards et al., 2020; Gibson & 
O’Connor, 2010; Lawler et al., 2013; Marrocco & Krouse, 2017; Matin 
et al., 2021; Trounson et al., 2020) and other recreational facilities 
(Bodde & Seo, 2009; Martin Ginis et al., 2016; Mulligan et al., 2012; 
Newitt et al., 2016). Transport accessibility was not just a matter of 
physical accessibility, but also included the available routes, the reli-
ability of the service and financial cost. The ways in which transport 
impacted access for disabled people was multifaceted, overlapping 
with barriers and enablers produced by the physical environment 
(e.g. whether public buses or trains could be accessed independently, 
distance from nearest transit stop to a facility), organisational and 
financial aspects (e.g. set appointment times, cost of private trans-
port) and social attitudes (Edwards et al., 2020; Matin et al., 2021). 
Transportation policies and services should consider physically ac-
cessibility issues, along with other barriers (such as cost and service 
frequency), to avoid social exclusion of disabled people.
Within rural and regional areas, a lack of health professionals 
and specialist healthcare services, along with high turnover of staff, 
was identified in three reviews (Barr et al., 2018; Lawler et al., 2013; 
Matin et  al.,  2021) as an impediment to care provision and care 
quality. The absence of local services necessitated travelling long 
distances to access specialised healthcare which, in turn, resulted 
in increased financial burden due to costs associated with work ab-
sence, travel and accommodation (Barr et al., 2018). However, the 
increasing availability of telemedicine services for disabled people 
was acknowledged as a potential resource to ameliorate the ab-
sence of local specialist care delivery (Barr et al., 2018).
4.4  |  Information, communication and care 
coordination
Inaccessible information and communication barriers were found to 
impact both on disabled people's access to, and utilisation of, health-
care, the quality of care received, and their ability to be fully informed 
decision-­makers in their own care (Beverley et al., 2004; Bradbury-­
Jones et  al.,  2013; Edwards et  al.,  2020; Heideveld-­Gerritsen 
et al., 2021; Horner-­Johnson et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2020). Common 
barriers included the provision of inaccessible or confusing informa-
tion in letters, referrals, brochures and medication labels (Beverley 
et al., 2004; Homeyard et al., 2016; Matin et al., 2021). The com-
monplace use of jargon and medical terminology was especially seen 
as a barrier for people with cognitive or intellectual impairments 
(Bradbury-­Jones et al., 2013). Within the acute care setting, a limited 
variety of visual or auditory media were used to convey health in-
formation. Where used, resources such as plain-­English factsheets, 
large print text, tactile maps, augmentative and alternative commu-
nication, and audio material enabled disabled people to exert their 
Authors
Review aim
Studies
Population
Disability
Trounson et al. (2020)
Identify factors that facilitate or 
impede the engagement of 
Aboriginal people living with 
disability with disability services
20 studies: 17 qualitative, 2 
theoretical, 1 book
Children and adults 
(Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait 
Islander people), 
age unspecified
Non-­specific disability
Wilbur et al. (2019)
Assess the menstrual hygiene 
requirements of disabled people, 
the barriers they face and 
available interventions
22 studies: 14 quantitative, 
7 qualitative, 1 
quasi-­experimental
Specified as people 
who menstruate 
and/or their carers, 
age unspecified
Non-­specific disability
Yang et al. (2020)
Identifying factors influencing self-­
care behaviours in adults with 
diabetes and disability
20 studies: 7 qualitative, 6 
quantitative, 6 quasi-­
experiment, 1 participatory 
action research
Adults ≥18 years with 
diabetes
Non-­specific disability
TA B LE 2 (Continued)
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    |  1267
MITCHELL et al.
right to informed consent, communication and choice (Beverley 
et al., 2004; Bradbury-­Jones et al., 2013; Homeyard et al., 2016) and 
are recommended.
The reviews identified a lack of clear information available to 
disabled people and their families in terms of available services 
and how to navigate them. Two reviews highlighted the deficiency 
of tailored health advice and information for individuals with dis-
abilities, for example guidance on undertaking physical activity 
with a disability (Mulligan et al., 2012; Newitt et al., 2016). Reviews 
focussing on disabled women's experiences reported the limited 
availability of relevant, high-­quality information on contraception, 
pregnancy, post-­partum support and parenting (Heideveld-­Gerritsen 
et al., 2021; Horner-­Johnson et al., 2019; Lawler et al., 2013; Matin 
et al., 2021). Even when credible and relevant information was avail-
able on the internet, for example, professional assistance may still 
be required to assist in locating and understanding the health mes-
saging (Barr et al., 2018). Complex language and complicated service 
structures were identified as leading to confusion and delayed ac-
cess to services (Beverley et al., 2004; Trounson et al., 2020). There 
was evidence in the reviews that poor communication between pro-
viders, or between providers and disabled people and their families, 
resulted in poor care coordination between services and fragmented 
care (Barr et al., 2018; Lawler et al., 2013). Improving care coordina-
tion could involve strategies, such as developing health information 
for disabled people that is disability-­specific and encouraging care 
providers to participating in communication skills training.
4.5  |  Government, organisational and 
financial policy
The wide-­ranging impact of government policies that determine the 
provision of health and social services, allocate funding for programs, 
set transport policies and legislate and enforce accessibility stand-
ards on the lives of disabled people was explicitly acknowledged in 
some reviews (Gibson & O’Connor, 2010; Marrocco & Krouse, 2017; 
Martin Ginis et al., 2016; Trounson et al., 2020:14). One review spe-
cifically examined the impact of government austerity measures in 
the United Kingdom on the quality of care for disabled people and 
found a lowering of the quality of care and support provided to a 
disabled person to achieve ADLs, leading to an increase in crisis 
health interventions rather than regular participation in preventive 
healthcare practices (Malli et al., 2018).
Organisational policies were viewed as creating barriers to 
service and care access in the form of eligibility criteria and in-
flexible models of care. In Australia, rigid intake streams and el-
igibility criteria for services can exclude Aboriginal people who 
have not obtained sufficient diagnostic testing due to limited 
Environmental factor themes 
identified
Health outcome 
examined
Quality assessment tool 
used
Author conclusions
Policy (government; 
organisation; financial)
Attitudes (providers)
Services (transport; 
information provision/
communication)
Care quality; 
Access to 
healthcare
CASP Qualitative Checklist 
Critical Appraisal Skills 
Programme (2018b)
Barriers included culture and Indigeneity (e.g. providers 
need to be more aware of impact of Indigenous culture, 
disability as a construct not a defining term, difficulty 
performing some cultural activities, need for strong 
community and family support network), accessibility 
(e.g. difficulties engaging with medical or government 
services, historical disablement, inflexible access pathways, 
complex language), engagement (e.g. service design does 
not account for cultural disparities, poor communication 
between service providers and consumers, lack of 
Indigenous inclusion and consultation in service design), 
lack of support (e.g. economic, isolation, psychological 
support needs not met).
Attitudes and support 
(providers and family)
Services (personal equipment; 
information provision/
communication)
Health-­
promoting 
behaviour—­
menstrual 
hygiene
Modified versions of 
STROBE and RATS 
Von Elm et al. (2007), 
risk of bias assessed 
using method by Banks 
et al. (2017)
Barriers included a lack of standard guidance for carers, lack 
of menstruation training, information and support for 
people with intellectual disabilities and their carers, cost of 
menstrual products, lack of appropriate alternative options 
for people with physical impairments.
Policy (financial)
Physical (environment)
Attitudes and support 
(providers and family)
Services (personal equipment; 
information provision/
communication)
Knowledge/training 
(providers)
Health promoting 
behaviour—­
diabetes 
self-­care
JBI Critical Appraisal 
Checklists Joanna 
Briggs Institute (JBI) 
(2020)
Barriers included other comorbidities, negative thoughts. 
Barriers specific to people with physical disabilities were 
mobility limitations, medically underserved areas and 
feeling overwhelmed. Barriers specific to people with 
visual impairments were a lack of accessible information on 
diabetes.
Facilitators included education, motivation and confidence. 
Support for people with developmental disabilities and 
helpful assistive devices and modifications to physical 
environments for people with visual impairments.
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1268 |   
MITCHELL et al.
prior interaction with health services (Trounson et al., 2020:14). 
Appointment inflexibility (e.g. long waits, set appointment times, 
short consultations) was another frequently identified barrier in 
the reviews impacting on the use of healthcare facilities, including 
antenatal, hospital and secondary healthcare services (Homeyard 
et al., 2016; Lawler et al., 2013). Government agencies and organ-
isations need to consider the health and service needs of disabled 
people within their health-­ and social-­related policies, especially 
service availability.
While lack of financial resources is an often-­cited barrier for 
the general population, it is especially prohibitive for people with 
disabilities who often experience financial constraints and are eco-
nomically vulnerable (Bodde & Seo, 2009; Breckenridge et al., 2014; 
Marrocco & Krouse, 2017; Matin et al., 2021). Two reviews identified 
TA B LE 3 Quality assessment using the JBI Critical Appraisal Checklist for Systematic Reviews and Research Synthesesb
Authors
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Q7
Q8
Q9
Q10
Q11
Qualitya
Barr et al. (2018)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
NA
Y
Y
High
Beverley et al. (2004)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Bloemen et al. (2015)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Bodde and Seo (2009)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
U
N
Y
U
Y
Y
High
Bradbury-­Jones et al. (2013)
Y
Y
Y
Y
U
U
U
Y
N
Y
Y
High
Breckenridge et al. (2014)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Da Rosa et al. (2020)
Y
U
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Mid
Edwards et al. (2020)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
High
Eisenberg et al. (2017)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
U
Y
Y
High
Gibson and O’Connor (2010)
Y
U
U
Y
Y
U
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Mid
Heideveld-­Gerritsen 
et al. (2021)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
U
Y
U
Y
Y
Mid
Homeyard et al. (2016)
Y
U
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Horner-­Johnson et al. (2019)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
High
Lawler et al. (2013)
Y
Y
Y
Y
U
U
U
U
U
Y
Y
Low
Malli et al. (2018)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
NA
High
Marrocco and Krouse (2017)
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
U
U
N
Y
Y
Mid
Martin Ginis et al. (2016)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
NA
High
Matin et al. (2021)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
High
Mulligan et al. (2012)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
NA
High
Newitt et al. (2016)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
U
Y
Y
NA
U
N
Mid
Trounson et al. (2020)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
U
Y
Y
NA
Y
Y
High
Wilbur et al. (2019)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
U
Y
Y
NA
NA
Y
Mid
Yang et al. (2020)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
NA
Y
Y
High
Abbreviations: N, No; NA, Not applicable; U, Unclear; Y, Yes.
aJoanna Brigg's Institute (JBI) critical appraisal checklist for systematic reviews and research syntheses, checklist items marked ‘yes’: <5 = low 
quality; 6–­8 = mid quality; >9 = high quality.
bJBI Critical Appraisal Checklist questions:
1. Is the review question clearly and explicitly stated?
2. Were the inclusion criteria appropriate for the review question?
3. Was the search strategy appropriate?
4. Were the sources and resources used to search for studies adequate?
5. Were the criteria for appraising studies appropriate?
6. Was critical appraisal conducted by two or more reviewers independently?
7. Were there methods to minimise errors in data extraction?
8. Were the methods used to combine studies appropriate?
9. Was the likelihood of publication bias assessed?
10. Were recommendations for policy and/or practice supported by the reported data?
11. Were the specific directives for new research appropriate?
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    |  1269
MITCHELL et al.
TA B LE 4 Environmental factor theme supporting quotations
CHIEF theme
Sub-­theme
Quotation
Authors
Policies
Policy—­government
“[themes emerging at the policy level]…frequently cited 
factors within the potential purview of government 
policy-­makers: health policies (specifically funding for 
programmes) and transportation services, systems, and 
policies.” (p487)
Martin Ginis 
et al. (2016)
“In terms of policy, the use of language, and the understanding 
of the cultural nuances about language, cultural 
understanding of disability and conditions associated with 
disability is exceptionally important when considering 
designing and delivering support services.” (p21)
Trounson et al. (2020)
Policy—­financial
“Cost is likely to be even more prohibitive for adults with ID 
[intellectual disability], many of whom live on very limited 
or fixed resources.” (p63)
Bodde and Seo (2009)
“..report the cost of care and medication being an issue for 
disabled people receiving or being satisfied with medical 
services.” (p26)
Gibson and 
O’Connor (2010)
Policy—­organisation
“Policies and guidelines that promote [physical] access should 
be devised, implemented, and audited on a regular basis.” 
(p213)
Lawler et al. (2013)
“..there is still considerable work to be done in the area of 
accessibility with most organisations addressing provision 
for individuals with disabilities as policy add-­on rather 
than forming an integral part of sports development 
strategies.” (p5)
Newitt et al. (2016)
Physical or 
structural
Physical—­environment
“Physical accessibility to the building is the first and most 
obvious challenge encountered by women with a physical 
disability when accessing maternity services.” (p211)
Lawler et al. (2013)
“Several studies identified physical obstacles as one reason 
for not accessing care and ultimately not receiving care.” 
(p285)
Marrocco and Krouse 
(2017)
Physical—­facility/equipment
“Physical inaccessibility [i.e. improper examination tables and 
inadequate equipment] is a major barrier to the effective 
utilisation of maternity services.” (p5)
Breckenridge 
et al. (2014)
“Disabled patients find it difficult to assess physicians’ offices 
and, once inside, experience other barriers such as fixed 
height examination couches that impede transfers.”(p26)
Gibson and 
O’Connor (2010)
Services or 
assistance
Services—­available programs/
services
“..families living in RRR [regional, rural and remote] areas 
had difficulties accessing specialist medical care and 
experienced allied health professional.” (p121)
Barr et al. (2018)
“Participants…travelled long distances to participate in 
exercise due to a lack of nearby accessible facilities.” (p5)
Newitt et al. (2016)
Services—­information provision/
communication
“Families of children with a disability reported a lack of 
information in RRR [regional, rural and remote] areas.” 
(p121)
Barr et al. (2018)
“..the latest information regarding diabetes was not readily 
shared in accessible ways and that diabetes educational 
forums attended by visually impaired people often lacked 
accessible non-­visual technology.”(p11)
Yang et al. (2020)
Services—­transport
“A consequence of the reduced choice of services in RRR 
[regional, rural and remote] areas is extensive travel for 
families to larger centres and cities.” (p121)
Barr et al. (2018)
“Organising transport to appointments was a concern along 
with unreliability, long waits, dealing with rude drivers, 
getting into and out of the vehicles, and having to cancel 
at short notice, along with having to take public transport 
which could often exacerbate existing symptoms.” (p7)
Edwards et al. (2020)
(Continues)
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1270 |   
MITCHELL et al.
that some health insurance companies in the United States did not 
cover the additional healthcare needs (e.g. additional examination 
time or procedures) of disabled people (Breckenridge et  al.,  2014; 
da Rosa et al., 2020), compounding the financial burden on the dis-
abled person. In some instances, reviews also reported that disabled 
people did not obtain health insurance because of the financial cost, 
and the limited coverage of services that they required (Marrocco 
& Krouse,  2017; Matin et  al.,  2021). Likewise, the cost of health-­
promoting behaviours that cater to people with disabilities, such as 
physical activity programs, may also prohibit participation (Bodde & 
Seo, 2009; Mulligan et al., 2012).
4.6  |  Attitudes and social support
Several reviews touched on the significance of the social environ-
ment in encouraging people with physical disabilities to participate 
in health-­promoting behaviours like physical activity (Bloemen 
et al., 2015; Bodde & Seo, 2009; Martin Ginis et al., 2016; Mulligan 
et  al.,  2012; Newitt et  al.,  2016). Reviews reported that disabled 
people can feel embarrassed to exercise in public, be wary of stere-
otyping and negative perceptions of disability, and become demoti-
vated by the low expectations and lack of encouragement to engage 
from staff, family and peers (Bloemen et  al.,  2015; Martin Ginis 
et al., 2016; Mulligan et al., 2012; Newitt et al., 2016). However, evi-
dence from the reviews also supported the converse. Participation 
in physical activity among disabled people was facilitated by positive 
support from family and the community, information on how to be 
involved, and encouragement and advice from health and exercise 
professionals (Bloemen et al., 2015; Martin Ginis et al., 2016; Newitt 
et al., 2016).
In relation to the utilisation of health services, it was also noted 
that ‘improving access to […] care cannot be achieved by addressing in-
ternal service barriers alone’ (Breckenridge et al., 2014, p.9). Reviews 
suggested that investing in community engagement and providing 
opportunities for social interaction extending to people with and 
without disabilities would likely strengthen support, increase engage-
ment with services and improve health and wellbeing for disabled 
people (Breckenridge et al., 2014; Trounson et al., 2020). In particular, 
it was acknowledged that adults with learning disabilities should be 
supported to make decisions regarding their own care based on their 
unique, individual needs and preferences (Bradbury-­Jones et al., 2013; 
Horner-­Johnson et al., 2019; Matin et al., 2021). Moreover, adults with 
learning disabilities should also be involved with policy development, 
awareness raising, service evaluation and research (Bradbury-­Jones 
et al., 2013).
4.7  |  Implications for policy, practice and research
There were common and cross-­cutting themes related to socio-­
environmental themes identified across different disabilities, age 
groups and types of health outcomes in the reviews. These common-
alities indicate that further work needs to be done to ensure ser-
vices are inclusive, health professionals are adequately trained and 
knowledgeable about providing disability-­focused care, and univer-
sal design principles are adopted for the built environment and medi-
cal equipment. Government policies should consider transportation 
CHIEF theme
Sub-­theme
Quotation
Authors
Services—­personal equipment
“…people with spinal cord injuries…reported discomfort 
and difficulty in positioning the menstrual product to 
ensure its maximum absorbency, as well as increasing 
difficulties with catheters and urinary management during 
menstruation.” (p10)
Wilbur et al. (2019)
“Intervention to enhance blood glucose self-­monitoring using 
other senses, including touch and hearing, were helpful in 
maintaining appropriate glucose levels or in increasing the 
quality of blood glucose monitoring.” (p12)
Yang et al. (2020)
Attitude or 
support
Attitudes and support—­
providers, community, family
“Strong social support from family, friends, and fitness staff 
is actually one of the best predictors of participating in 
regular PA [physical activity].” (p62)
Bodde and Seo (2009)
“There is strong evidence that women with physical 
disabilities encounter unwillingness to provide assistance 
on the part of healthcare providers.” (p9)
Heideveld-­Gerritsen 
et al. (2021)
Knowledge/training—­providers
“Lack of basic understanding reduced nurses’ ability to pick 
up on cues, and they recognised the impact of this on their 
competence and confidence in caring.” (p1504)
Bradbury-­Jones 
et al. (2013)
“While specialists may lack knowledge about general health 
issues, general practitioners may lack knowledge about 
outcomes in specific disabling conditions.” (p26)
Gibson and 
O’Connor (2010)
Abbreviation: CHIEF, Craig Hospital Inventory of Environmental Factors.
TA B LE 4 (Continued)
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    |  1271
MITCHELL et al.
issues and service availability in regional areas, including telehealth 
capacity and availability. Plain-­language messaging in different for-
mats (e.g. large print, tactile) and involving disabled people in service 
design is vital.
There were certain population sub-­groups where there was a lack 
of reviews examining social, physical or attitudinal factors influenc-
ing health outcomes, including for disabled children (i.e. ≤16 years) 
and older people (i.e. ≥65  years). With the ageing of the popula-
tion in many high-­income countries (United Nations Department 
of Economic & Social Affairs: Population Division, 2020), there are 
likely to be key factors relating to ageing and disability that are unac-
knowledged. Reviews focusing solely on disabled men were largely 
absent, particularly for preventive health behaviour, such as cancer 
screening services (Edwards et al., 2020).
Overall, there was limited information on specific health outcomes 
(e.g. care complications, hospital readmissions) of disabled people using 
primary, acute, sub-­acute or community-­based health services. This is 
predominantly due to disability not being recorded or easily identi-
fied in routine administrative data collections, such as hospitalisation, 
emergency department or primary care data (Halcomb et al., 2019). 
There are increasing opportunities for better identification of disabled 
people in health data collections through linking health and social data 
collections. Assessing publication bias in systematic reviews aids in 
limiting bias towards the inclusion of studies in reviews based on the 
strength or direction of supporting evidence (Ayorinde et al., 2020). 
That only six of the reviews in the current overview assessed the risk 
of publication bias opens some reviews up to selection bias, which 
could influence review outcomes.
4.8  |  Strengths and limitations
The strengths of this overview of systematic reviews were the 
comprehensive search strategy, that the review followed the 
PRISMA guideline, and multiple reviewers were involved in the 
data extraction and synthesis phases with high interrater reli-
ability. Any disagreements were discussed between reviewers 
with consensus achieved. The overview also had several limita-
tions. Only systematic reviews were considered, therefore other 
reviews (such as integrative and scoping reviews) were excluded 
that may have contributed additional insights. There is a potential 
risk of bias in the identification of the key socio-­environmental 
factors due to the possible overrepresentation of individual 
studies that were included in multiple systematic reviews. 
Reviews published in non-­English languages and that considered 
studies only from low-­ and middle-­income countries were ex-
cluded, which may result in language-­ and generalisability-­bias 
respectively.
FI G U R E 2 Number of socio-­environmental themes identified by health outcome for disabled people1 
 
1Mulple themes and health outcomes could be idenﬁed for each systemac review. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Services - personal equipment
Atudes - providers and peers
Policy - government
Atudes - providers and family
Services - available programs
Atudes - providers and community
Policy - organisaon
Physical - environment
Policy - ﬁnancial
Atudes - providers
Services - transport
Services - informaon provision/communicaon
Physical - facility/equipment
Knowledge/training - providers
Number
Socio-environmental theme
Access to healthcare
Care quality
Health promong
behaviour
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1272 |   
MITCHELL et al.
5  |  CONCLUSIONS
Disabled people encounter common social, physical and attitudinal 
factors that can hinder their health outcomes in terms of access to 
services and quality healthcare. Many preventive health and health-
care services were identified as either inaccessible or not meeting 
the needs of disabled people. There is an obvious need to reduce 
health and social inequalities in access to healthcare and participa-
tion for disabled people. Greater involvement of disabled people in 
service design and awareness raising is essential.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Ms Mary Simons, medical research librarian, for 
her expertise and guidance regarding the development of the search 
terminology.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
R. 
Mitchell: 
Conceptualisation, 
Methodology, 
Investigation; 
Writing-­Original draft preparation, Writing—­Review & Editing; T 
Ryder: Methodology, Investigation, Writing-­Original draft prepara-
tion, Writing—­Review & Editing; K. Matar: Investigation; R. Lystad: 
Writing—­Review & Editing; R. Clay-­Williams: Writing—­Review & 
Editing; J. Braithwaite: Writing—­Review & Editing.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were gen-
erated or analysed during the current study.
ORCID
Reidar P. Lystad 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0506-0902 
REFERENCES
Andresen, E. M., Peterson-­Besse, J. J., Krahn, G. L., Walsh, E. S., Horner-­
Johnson, W., & Iezzoni, L. I. (2013). Pap, mammography, and clinical 
breast examination screening among women with disabilities: A 
systematic review. Womens Health Issues, 23, e205–­e214. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.whi.2013.04.002
Attree, P. (2004). Growing up in disadvantage: A systematic review of the 
qualitative evidence. Child: Care, Health and Development, 30, 679–­
689. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-­2214.2004.00480.x
Attree, P., & Milton, B. (2006). Critically appraising qualitative re-
search for systematic reviews: Defusing the methodological 
cluster bombs. Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research, Debate 
and Practice, 2, 109–­126. https://doi.org/10.1332/17442​64067​
75249688
Ayorinde, A. A., Williams, I., Mannion, R., Song, F., Skrybant, M., Lilford, 
R. J., & Chen, Y.-­F. (2020). Assessment of publication bias and out-
come reporting bias in systematic reviews of health services and 
delivery research: A meta-­epidemiological study. PLoS One, 15, 
e0227580. https://doi.org/10.1371/journ​al.pone.0227580
Banks, L. M., Mearkle, R., Mactaggart, I., Walsham, M., Kuper, H., & 
Blanchet, K. (2017). Disability and social protection programmes 
in low-­and middle-­income countries: A systematic review. Oxford 
Development Studies, 45, 223–­239. https://doi.org/10.1080/13600​
818.2016.1142960
Barr, M., Duncan, J., & Dally, K. (2018). A systematic review of services 
to DHH children in rural and remote regions. The Journal of Deaf 
Studies and Deaf Education, 23, 118–­130. https://doi.org/10.1093/
deafe​d/enx059
Beverley, C. A., Bath, P. A., & Booth, A. (2004). Health information needs 
of visually impaired people: A systematic review of the literature. 
Health and Social Care in the Community, 12, 1–­24. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365-­2524.2004.00460.x
Bloemen, M. A. T., Backx, F. J. G., Takken, T., Wittink, H., Benner, J., 
Mollema, J., & Groot, J. F. (2015). Factors associated with physi-
cal activity in children and adolescents with a physical disability: 
A systematic review. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 57, 
137–­148. https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.12624
Bodde, A. E., & Seo, D. C. (2009). A review of social and environmental 
barriers to physical activity for adults with intellectual disabilities. 
Disability and Health Journal, 2, 57–­66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
dhjo.2008.11.004
Booth, A., & Brice, A. (2001). Research Column: The CRItical Skills 
Training in Appraisal for Librarians (CriSTAL) project. Health 
Information and Libraries Journal, 18, 175–­177.
Bowen, C. N., Havercamp, S. M., Karpiak Bowen, S., & Nye, G. (2020). 
A call to action: Preparing a disability-­competent health care 
workforce. Disability and Health Journal, 13, 100941. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.dhjo.2020.100941
Bradbury-­Jones, C., Rattray, J., Jones, M., & MacGillivray, S. (2013). 
Promoting the health, safety and welfare of adults with learning 
disabilities in acute care settings: A structured literature review. 
Journal of Clinical Nursing, 22, 1497–­1509. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jocn.12109
Breckenridge, J. P., Devaney, J., Kroll, T., Lazenbatt, A., Taylor, J., & 
Bradbury-­Jones, C. (2014). Access and utilisation of maternity 
care for disabled women who experience domestic abuse: A sys-
tematic review. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth, 14, 234. https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-­2393-­14-­234
Calder, A., Sole, G., & Mulligan, H. (2018). The accessibility of fitness 
centers for people with disabilities: A systematic review. Disability 
and Health Journal, 11, 525–­536. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
dhjo.2018.04.002
Caldwell, K., Henshaw, L., & Taylor, G. (2011). Developing a frame-
work for critiquing health research: An early evaluation. Nurse 
Education Today, 31, e1–­e7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nedt.2010.​
11.025
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). Common barriers to 
participation experienced by people with disabilities. Retrieved from 
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbdd​d/disab​ility​andhe​alth/disab​ility​-­barri​
ers.html
Cho, H., MacLachlan, M., Clarke, M., & Mannan, H. (2016). Accessible 
home environments for people with functional limitations: A sys-
tematic review. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 13(8), 826. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerp​h1308​0826
Craig Hospital Research Department. (2001). Craig hospital inventory of 
environmental factors (CHIEF). Version 3.0., 33.
Critical Appraisal Skills Programme. (2018a). CASP cohort study checklist. 
Retreived from https://casp-­uk.net/wp-­conte​nt/uploa​ds/2018/​
01/CASP-­Quali​tativ​e-­Check​list-­2018.pdf
Critical Appraisal Skills Programme. (2018b). CASP qualitative checklist. 
Retrieved from https://casp-­uk.net/wp-­conte​nt/uploa​ds/2018/​
01/CASP-­Quali​tativ​e-­Check​list-­2018.pdf
Critical Appraisal Skills Programme. (2018c). CASP systematic review 
checklist. Retrieved from https://casp-­uk.b-­cdn.net/wp-­conte​nt/
uploa​ds/2018/03/CASP-­Syste​matic​-­Revie​w-­Check​list-­2018_filla​
ble-­form.pdf
da Rosa, S. V., Moysés, S. J., Theis, L. C., Soares, R. C., Moysés, S. T., 
Werneck, R. I., & Rocha, J. S. (2020). Barriers in access to dental 
services hindering the treatment of people with disabilities: A sys-
tematic review. International Journal of Dentistry, 2020, 9074618. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/9074618
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
    |  1273
MITCHELL et al.
Daly, J., Willis, K., Small, R., Green, J., Welch, N., Kealy, M., & Hughes, 
E. (2007). A hierarchy of evidence for assessing qualitative health 
research. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 60, 43–­49. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclin​epi.2006.03.014
Department of Health Long-­Term Conditions NSF Team. (2005). The 
national service framework for long-­term conditions. Department of 
Health.
Downs, S. H., & Black, N. (1998). The feasibility of creating a checklist for 
the assessment of the methodological quality both of randomised 
and non-­randomised studies of health care interventions. Journal 
of Epidemiology & Community Health, 52, 377–­384. https://doi.
org/10.1136/jech.52.6.377
Drainoni, M.-­L., Lee-­Hood, E., Tobias, C., Bachman, S. S., Andrew, J., 
& Maisels, L. (2006). Cross-­disability experiences of barriers to 
health-­care access. Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 17, 101–­115. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/10442​07306​01700​20101
Edwards, D. J., Sakellariou, D., & Anstey, S. (2020). Barriers to, and fa-
cilitators of, access to cancer services and experiences of cancer 
care for adults with a physical disability: A mixed methods system-
atic review. Disability and Health Journal, 13, 100844. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.dhjo.2019.100844
Effective Public Health Practice Project. (2018). Quality assessment tool 
for quantitative studies. Retreived from https://merst.ca/wp-­conte​
nt/uploa​ds/2018/02/quali​ty-­asses​sment​-­tool_2010.pdf
Eisenberg, Y., Vanderbom, K. A., & Vasudevan, V. (2017). Does the built 
environment moderate the relationship between having a disability 
and lower levels of physical activity? A systematic review. Preventive 
Medicine, 95S, S75–­S84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2016.​
07.019
Gibson, J. C., & O’Connor, R. J. (2010). Access to health care for disabled 
people: A systematic review. Social Care and Neurodisability, 1(3), 
21–­31. https://doi.org/10.5042/scn.2010.0599
Halcomb, E. J., Peters, K., & Smyth, E. (2019). Health screening for 
women with physical disability in Australian general practice: 
A survey. Collegian, 26, 250–­255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
colegn.2018.07.008
Hashemi, G., Wickenden, M., Bright, T., & Kuper, H. (2020). Barriers 
to accessing primary healthcare services for people with disabil-
ities in low and middle-­income countries, a Meta-­synthesis of 
qualitative studies. Disability and Rehabilitation, 1–­14. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09638​288.2020.1817984
Heideveld-­Gerritsen, M., van Vulpen, M., Hollander, M., Oude Maatman, 
S., Ockhuijsen, H., & van den Hoogen, A. (2021). Maternity care 
experiences of women with physical disabilities: A system-
atic review. Midwifery, 96, 102938. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
midw.2021.102938
Higgins, J. P. T., Altman, D. G., Gotzsche, P. C., Juni, P., Moher, D., Oxman, 
A. D., Savovic, J., Schulz, K. F., Weeks, L., & Sterne, J. A. C. (2011). The 
Cochrane Collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised 
trials. BMJ, 343, d5928. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.d5928
Homeyard, C., Montgomery, E., Chinn, D., & Patelarou, E. (2016). Current 
evidence on antenatal care provision for women with intellectual 
disabilities: A systematic review. Midwifery, 32, 45–­57. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.midw.2015.10.002
Horner-­Johnson, W., Moe, E. L., Stoner, R. C., Klein, K. A., Edelman, A. B., 
Eden, K. B., Andresen, E. M., Caughey, A. B., & Guise, J.-­M. (2019). 
Contraceptive knowledge and use among women with intellectual, 
physical, or sensory disabilities: A systematic review. Disability and Health 
Journal, 12, 139–­154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dhjo.2018.11.006
Iacono, T., Bigby, C., Unsworth, C., Douglas, J., & Fitzpatrick, P. (2014). A 
systematic review of hospital experiences of people with intellec-
tual disability. BMC Health Services Research, 14, 1–­8. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s1291​3-­014-­0505-­5
Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI). (2020). Critical appraisal tools. Retrieved 
from https://jbi.globa​l/criti​cal-­appra​isal-­tools
Kavanagh, A. (2020). Disability and public health research in Australia. 
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 44, 262–­264. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1753-­6405.13003
Law, M. D., Stewart, D., Pollock, N., Letts, L., Bosch, J., & Westmorland, 
M. (1998). Critical review form—­Quantitative studies. Retrieved from 
https://healt​hsci.mcmas​ter.ca/docs/libra​riesp​rovid​er130/​defau​
lt-­docum​ent-­libra​ry/criti​cal-­revie​w-­form-­quant​itati​ve-­studi​es-­
engli​sh6b5​cae38​a1784​9c8ab​ad24e​fed28​e4a8.pdf?sfvrs​n=95293​
2a2_2
Lawler, D., Lalor, J., & Begley, C. (2013). Access to maternity services for 
women with a physical disability: A systematic review of the litera-
ture. International Journal of Childbirth, 3, 203–­217. https://doi.org/
10.1891/2156-­5287.3.4.203
Letts, L., Wilkins, S., Law, M., Stewart, D., Bosch, J., & Westmorland, 
M. (2007). Critical review form—­Qualitative studies. Version 2.0. 
Retrieved from https://healt​hsci.mcmas​ter.ca/docs/libra​riesp​rovid​
er130/​defau​lt-­docum​ent-­libra​ry/criti​cal-­revie​w-­form-­quali​tativ​e-­
studi​es-­versi​on-­2-­1.pdf?sfvrs​n=6723c​450_2
Lindsay, S. (2016). Child and youth experiences and perspectives of ce-
rebral palsy: A qualitative systematic review. Child: Care, Health and 
Development, 42, 153–­175. https://doi.org/10.1111/cch.12309
Malli, M. A., Sams, L., Forrester-­Jones, R., Murphy, G., & Henwood, M. 
(2018). Austerity and the lives of people with learning disabilities. 
A thematic synthesis of current literature. Disability & Society, 33, 
1412–­1435. https://doi.org/10.1080/09687​599.2018.1497950
Marrocco, A., & Krouse, H. J. (2017). Obstacles to preventive care for 
individuals with disability: Implications for nurse practitioners. 
Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, 29(5), 282–­
293. https://doi.org/10.1002/2327-­6924.12449
Martin Ginis, K. A., Ma, J. K., Latimer-­Cheung, A. E., & Rimmer, J. H. 
(2016). A systematic review of review articles addressing factors 
related to physical activity participation among children and adults 
with physical disabilities. Health Psychology Review, 10(4), 478–­494. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437​199.2016.1198240
Matin, B. K., Williamson, H. J., Karyani, A. K., Rezaei, S., Soofi, M., & 
Soltani, S. (2021). Barriers in access to healthcare for women with 
disabilities: A systematic review in qualitative studies. BMC Womens 
Health, 21, 44. https://doi.org/10.1186/s1290​5-­021-­01189​-­5
Merten, J. W., Pomeranz, J. L., King, J. L., Moorhouse, M., & Wynn, R. D. 
(2015). Barriers to cancer screening for people with disabilities: A 
literature review. Disability and Health Journal, 8(1), 9–­16. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.dhjo.2014.06.004
Mithen, J., Aitken, Z., Ziersch, A., & Kavanagh, A. M. (2015). Inequalities 
in social capital and health between people with and without 
disabilities. Social Science and Medicine, 126, 26–­35. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.socsc​imed.2014.12.009
Mulligan, H. F., Hale, L. A., Whitehead, L., & Baxter, G. D. (2012). Barriers 
to physical activity for people with long-­term neurological con-
ditions: A review study. Adapted Physical Activity Quarterly, 29(3), 
243–­265. https://doi.org/10.1123/apaq.29.3.243
National People with Disabilities and Carer Council. (2009). SHUT OUT: 
The experience of people with disabilities and their families in Australia. 
Australian Government.
Newhouse, R. P., Dearholt, S. L., Poe, S. S., Pugh, L. C., & White, K. M. 
(2007). Johns Hopkins nursing evidence-­based practice model and 
guidelines.
Newitt, R., Barnett, F., & Crowe, M. (2016). Understanding factors 
that influence participation in physical activity among people 
with a neuromusculoskeletal condition: A review of qualita-
tive studies. Disability and Rehabilitation, 38, 1–­10. https://doi.
org/10.3109/09638​288.2014.996676
O’Brien, B. C., Harris, I. B., Beckman, T. J., Reed, D. A., & Cook, D. A. 
(2014). Standards for reporting qualitative research: A synthesis of 
recommendations. Academic Medicine, 89, 1245–­1251. https://doi.
org/10.1097/ACM.00000​00000​000388
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1274 |   
MITCHELL et al.
Olaussen, S. J., & Renzaho, A. M. N. (2016). Establishing components 
of cultural competence healthcare models to better cater for the 
needs of migrants with disability: A systematic review. Australian 
Journal of Primary Health, 22, 100–­112. https://doi.org/10.1071/​
PY14114
Pace, R., Pluye, P., Bartlett, G., Macaulay, A. C., Salsberg, J., Jagosh, 
J., & Seller, R. (2012). Testing the reliability and efficiency of the 
pilot Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT) for systematic mixed 
studies review. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 49, 47–­53. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnur​stu.2011.07.002
Pelleboer-­Gunnink, H. A., Van Oorsouw, W. M. W. J., Van Weeghel, J., 
& Embregts, P. J. C. M. (2017). Mainstream health professionals' 
stigmatising attitudes towards people with intellectual disabilities: 
A systematic review. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 61, 
411–­434. https://doi.org/10.1111/jir.12353
Pollock, M., Fernandes, R. M., Becker, L. A., Pieper, D., & Hartling, L. 
(2021) Overviews of reviews. In J. P. Higgins, J. Thomas, J. Chandler, 
M. Cumpston, T. Li, M. J. Page, & V. A. Welch (Eds.), Cochrane hand-
book for systematic reviews of interventions. Cochrane Training. 
https://train​ing.cochr​ane.org/handb​ook/current
Reichard, A., Stolzle, H., & Fox, M. H. (2011). Health disparities among 
adults with physical disabilities or cognitive limitations compared 
to individuals with no disabilities in the United States. Disability and 
Health Journal, 4, 59–­67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dhjo.2010.05.003
Robertson, J., Raghavan, R., Emerson, E., Baines, S., & Hatton, C. (2019). What 
do we know about the health and health care of people with intellec-
tual disabilities from minority ethnic groups in the United Kingdom? A 
systematic review. Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 
32, 1310–­1334. https://doi.org/10.1111/jar.12630
Russell, C. K., & Gregory, D. M. (2003). Evaluation of qualitative research 
studies. Evidence-­Based Nursing, 6, 36–­40. https://doi.org/10.1136/
ebn.6.2.36
Satchidanand, N., Gunukula, S. K., Lam, W. Y., McGuigan, D., New, I., 
Symons, A. B., Withiam-­Leitch, M., & Akl, E. A. (2012). Attitudes 
of healthcare students and professionals toward patients with 
physical disability: A systematic review. American Journal of Physical 
Medicine and Rehabilitation, 91, 533–­545. https://doi.org/10.1097/
PHM.0b013​e3182​555ea4
Shea, B. J., Hamel, C., Wells, G. A., Bouter, L. M., Kristjansson, E., 
Grimshaw, J., Henry, D. A., & Boers, M. (2009). AMSTAR is a reliable 
and valid measurement tool to assess the methodological quality of 
systematic reviews. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 62, 1013–­1020. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclin​epi.2008.10.009
The Joanna Briggs Institute. (2017). Checklist for systematic reviews and 
research syntheses. Retrieved from http://joann​abrig​gs.org/resea​
rch/criti​cal-­appra​isal-­tools.html
Tong, A., Sainsbury, P., & Craig, J. (2007). Consolidated criteria for re-
porting qualitative research (COREQ): A 32-­item checklist for in-
terviews and focus groups. International Journal for Quality in Health 
Care, 19, 349–­357. https://doi.org/10.1093/intqh​c/mzm042
Trounson, J. S., Gibbs, J., Kostrz, K., McDonald, R., & Peters, A. (2020). A 
systematic literature review of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
engagement with disability services. Disability & Society, 1–­25. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09687​599.2020.1862640
United Nations. (2006). Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities 
and optional protocol.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs: Popu­
lation Division. (2020). World Population Ageing 2020. United 
Nations.
von Elm, E., Altman, D. G., Egger, M., Pocock, S. J., Gøtzsche, P. C., & 
Vandenbroucke, J. P. (2007). The Strengthening the Reporting 
of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) statement: 
Guidelines for reporting observational studies. Annals of Internal 
Medicine, 147, 573–­577. https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-­4819-­147-­
8-­20071​0160-­00010
Wade, D. T., & Halligan, P. W. (2004). Do biomedical models of illness 
make for good health care systems? BMJ, 329, 1398–­1401. https://
doi.org/10.1136/bmj.329.7479.1398
Walsh, D., & Downe, S. (2006). Appraising the quality of qualitative research. 
Midwifery, 22, 108–­119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.midw.2005.05.004
Wells, G. A., Shea, B., O’Connell, D., Peterson, J., Welch, V., Losos, M., & 
Tugwell, P. (2000). The Newcastle-­Ottawa Scale (NOS) for assessing 
the quality of nonrandomised studies in meta-­analyses. Oxford.
Wilbur, J., Torondel, B., Hameed, S., Mahon, T., & Kuper, H. (2019). 
Systematic review of menstrual hygiene management require-
ments, its barriers and strategies for disabled people. PLoS One, 14, 
e0210974. https://doi.org/10.1371/journ​al.pone.0210974
Wilson, N. J., Macdonald, J., Hayman, B., Bright, A. M., Frawley, P., & 
Gallego, G. (2018). A narrative review of the literature about peo-
ple with intellectual disability who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, intersex or questioning. Journal of Intellectual Disabilities, 
22, 171–­196. https://doi.org/10.1177/17446​29516​682681
World Health Organization. (2011). World report on disability. WHO.
World Health Organization. (2021). International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). Retrieved from https://
www.who.int/stand​ards/class​ifica​tions/​inter​natio​nal-­class​ifica​
tion-­of-­funct​ionin​g-­disab​ility​-­and-­health
Yang, E., Kim, H. J., Ryu, H., & Chang, S. J. (2020). Diabetes self-­care be-
haviors in adults with disabilities: A systematic review. Japan Journal 
of Nursing Science, 17, e12289. https://doi.org/10.1111/jjns.12289
Zaza, S., Wright-­De Agüero, L. K., Briss, P. A., Truman, B. I., Hopkins, D. P., 
Hennessy, M. H., Sosin, D. M., Anderson, L., Carande-­Kulis, V. G., 
Teutsch, S. M., & Pappaioanou, M. (2000). Data collection instrument 
and procedure for systematic reviews in the Guide to Community 
Preventive Services. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 18, 44–­74.
SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information may be found in the online ver-
sion of the article at the publisher’s website.
How to cite this article: Mitchell, R. J., Ryder, T., Matar, K., 
Lystad, R. P., Clay-­Williams, R., & Braithwaite, J. (2022). An 
overview of systematic reviews to determine the impact of 
socio-­environmental factors on health outcomes of people 
with disabilities. Health & Social Care in the Community, 30, 
1254–­1274. https://doi.org/10.1111/hsc.13665
 13652524, 2022, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/hsc.13665 by CochraneItalia, Wiley Online Library on [07/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
