https://doi.org/10.1177/13623613221118158
Autism
2023, Vol. 27(3) 822­–831
© The Author(s) 2022
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/13623613221118158
journals.sagepub.com/home/aut
There is a growing body of literature on the experiences of 
autistic students in higher education. This includes research 
into rates and predictors of postsecondary education enrol-
ment (Chiang et al., 2012; Flower et al., 2021), and rea-
sons for discontinuing university studies (Cage & Howes, 
2020). Aspects of educational experiences, needs and sup-
port provisions have been examined (Cai & Richdale, 
2016; Chandrasekhar, 2020; Elias & White, 2018; McLeod 
et al., 2019), as well as the social experiences of autistic 
university students, including interaction and exclusion 
(Goddard & Cook, 2022; Gurbuz et al., 2019), social 
supports, networks and anxiety (Lei et al., 2019, 2020) and 
experiences of bullying (DeNigris et al., 2018).
What is surprisingly absent from the literature is 
research on the experiences of autistic people working in 
Autistics working in academia:  
What are the barriers and  
facilitators?
Sandra C Jones
Abstract
Autistic people are under-represented in university student populations, but their numbers are growing, and the barriers 
to their inclusion are being recognised. Outside of the student body, autistic people in academia are often overlooked, 
although this is starting to change with the growth in inclusive autism research. However, they remain absent from 
the academic literature, despite the evident synergies between autistic strengths and academic careers. This study 
explored the perceptions of 37 autistic academics from various disciplines: what are the positives of working in academia 
for autistic people, and what are the negatives? Participants reported many positive aspects of an academic career, 
including the fit with the strengths, characteristics and motivations of autistic people. However, they also noted barriers 
and challenges – social, environmental and structural – many of which could be addressed by greater awareness and 
acceptance of autism. Given the considerable benefits that autistic teachers and researchers bring to higher education, 
there is a clear need for universities and colleges to implement changes to the physical and social environment to make 
academia more inclusive.
Lay Abstract 
Academia appears to provide an ideal career option for autistic people: the opportunity to lock ourselves away in an 
ivory tower and utilise our extensive knowledge of a very specific topic. We know autistic people are underrepresented 
in postsecondary education, and there is a growing body of research on how to make universities more inclusive. What 
is missing from the literature is the voices of autistic people who have survived the university experience and gone 
on to become university teachers and researchers. Increasing the visibility of autistics in academia, and exploring the 
barriers and facilitators they experience in an academic career, is important to raise the aspirations of future university 
students and graduates. This study included 37 autistic academics from various disciplines and countries, exploring their 
perceptions of the positive and negative aspects of being an autistic in academia.
Keywords
employment, higher education, lived experience
Australian Catholic University, Australia
Corresponding author:
Sandra C Jones, Australian Catholic University, St Patrick’s Campus, 
Level 2, 340 Albert Street, East Melbourne, VIC 3002, Australia. 
Email: sandra.jones@acu.edu.au
1118158 AUT0010.1177/13623613221118158AutismJones
research-article2022
Original Article
Jones	
823
academia; that is, those who have completed graduate 
studies and embarked on a research and/or teaching career. 
This is in part due to the long history of autism research 
centred in a pathology paradigm (Walker & Raymaker, 
2020), with autistic people seen as inferior and disordered. 
Such a paradigm promulgates the belief that advances in 
our understanding of autism and how to support autistic 
people will come from neurotypical researchers, and mini-
mises the contribution of autistic people to ‘end-users’ 
rather than generators of knowledge. It also promulgates 
the assumption that autistic people will not be present in 
higher education and that those ‘rare few’ who are must be 
‘less autistic’, and the associated stigma deters those who 
are working in academia from disclosing.
As Milton et al. (2019) note in their reflection on the 
establishment of the Participatory Autism Research 
Collective and the issues facing autistic individuals work-
ing in the autism field, ‘. . . we are aware of a vast array of 
issues that we share and with which we need support. 
These may apply more broadly to many autistic autism 
professionals and/or activists but are contextualised in a 
different way within academia’ (p. 86). If we are to encour-
age more autistic individuals to undertake education and 
training to become researchers and thus have an equal 
space at the table with non-autistic researchers, we need to 
understand what aspects of the role and environment are 
conducive to (and what presents barriers to) autistic indi-
viduals succeeding in the academy.
Recently we have seen a small number of papers reflect-
ing on ways that academia could be more inclusive and 
supportive for autistic people, typically from the perspec-
tive of an autistic scholar contemplating their experiences. 
For example, Taylor and Johnson (2020) reflect on the first 
author’s experiences as a doctoral student in geosciences 
and suggest ways that the field could be more inclusive; 
and Raymaker (2017) reflects on being an insider-researcher 
in a community-based participatory research setting.
Going beyond the experiences of one individual, Martin 
(2021) reports on a questionnaire study that explored the 
experiences of 12 autistic researchers (doctoral students, 
part-time researchers and other non-permanent roles) and 
‘revealed barriers at every stage of the employment jour-
ney for autistic academics and highlighted relatively 
straightforward ways of circumventing them based on 
principles of Universal Design’ (p. 14). A recent autistic 
autism researchers’ roundtable (Dwyer et al., 2021) 
reflected on several topics, including the importance of 
autistic and intersectional identities, ways in which autistic 
autism researchers can enhance the quality of autism 
research, tensions and conflicts that we face as autistic 
autism researchers, and ways in which inflexible institu-
tions and practices can impose barriers that restrict autistic 
involvement in academia.
The purpose of this study was to explore the perspec-
tives and experiences of autistic individuals working in 
academia across various disciplines on the benefits and 
barriers to pursuing a career in the academy.
Method
Participants and procedure
This study formed part of a larger longitudinal project con-
ducted across 12 months and involving 37 autistic academ-
ics (defined as working in, or having recently worked in, a 
university in a teaching and/or research and/or governance 
role). Participants were recruited via the promotion of the 
study on social media and through word of mouth. The 
social media posts directed interested individuals to a web-
site that provided study details, a downloadable consent 
form and an email address for study enrolment.
Each month, participants were invited via email to pro-
vide a written reflection on a specific topic, and although 
prompts were provided, participants were encouraged to 
write about any aspect of the topic that was of interest or 
relevance to them. Participation for each topic was 
optional; however, participants were only included in the 
sample if they completed and returned the consent form, 
statistical data sheet and at least four reflections. Twenty-
eight participants (72%) completed all 12 monthly reflec-
tions, 31 at least nine and 33 at least six.
In January 2021, participants were invited to provide a 
written reflection on the topic of ‘Being an Autistic in 
Academia’ and all 37 participants (100%) returned a 
reflection, ranging in length from 189 to 2965 words 
(x = 1081). This invitation prompted them to reflect on 
negative aspects of employment in academia (What chal-
lenges do you experience in your job? What do you like 
the least about your job?) and positive aspects (What do 
you like the most about your job?).
All participants were either currently working in aca-
demia (n = 26), had previously worked in academia (n = 7) 
and/or were undertaking doctoral studies (n = 12), with 
period of employment in academia ranging from 1 to 
23 years. The majority had a formal autism diagnosis 
(n = 32); 21 identified as female, nine as male and seven as 
non-binary. Participants resided in Australia (n = 13), the 
United States (n = 11), Canada (n = 5), the United Kingdom 
(n = 5), New Zealand and continental Europe. Participants 
came from various disciplines, including creative arts, 
education, engineering, health, languages, leadership, psy-
chology, sciences, social sciences and sociology.
Data analysis
Reflections were saved into a consistent format and 
imported into NVivo for coding. An inductive approach 
to data analysis was utilised, following Braun and 
Clarke’s approach to reflexive thematic analysis (Braun 
& Clarke, 2019). This approach was chosen because the 
824	
Autism 27(3)
aim of the study was to understand the benefits and chal-
lenges of autistic people working in universities, as they 
experience them. Consistent with the author’s position as 
an ‘insider researcher’ this paradigm recognises that the 
researcher’s own lived experiences will influence inter-
pretation of the data.
The analysis process was iterative, with initial codes 
created and a visual map produced to identify overlapping 
and intersecting codes. Following a close reading of all 
transcripts, each transcript was coded line by line with ini-
tial codes generated as new concepts or ideas were identi-
fied. This resulted in a total of 117 initial codes. The codes 
were then refined and merged with constant reference to 
the content of each lower-order code, and constant updat-
ing of the visual map. Based on a thorough review of all 
codes and their content, 11 provisional themes were gener-
ated. These were further refined and combined to elimi-
nate overlapping themes and ensure that all included text 
was relevant to the overarching theme, resulting in a total 
of five themes.
Data were anonymised, with participants providing 
their preferred pseudonyms for analysis and reporting. 
The results were shared with all participants to ensure 
that the interpretation aligned with their reflections and 
lived experience.
Researcher positionality
The researcher is a late-diagnosed autistic woman, parent 
of two autistic people, autism advocate and experienced 
autism researcher. She has been working in academia for 
more than 20 years as a researcher, manager and senior 
administrator. While she did not know the participants 
personally, the in-depth nature of the study means she 
was privy to their thoughts and perspectives on a range of 
very personal issues; the ongoing nature of the study 
meant that she interacted with them regularly via email. 
She also identified with many of their perspectives and 
was struck by the similarity of their experiences to her 
own as an autistic in academia.
Community involvement statement
This research was conducted entirely by autistic people. 
The author is an autistic autism researcher. A panel of four 
autistic people reviewed the data collection tools for clar-
ity, comprehensiveness and inclusive language; these indi-
viduals were working as researchers and/or undertaking 
doctoral studies and did not participate in the study. All 
study participants are autistic.
Results
The five themes the author generated from the analysis of 
reflections on the positives and negatives of autistic people 
working in academia are discussed below in order of their 
prominence within the data and the emphasis placed on 
these issues in the reflections.
Social interaction is complicated
The complexities of social interaction and the challenges it 
poses for working in academia, including the energy 
required for constant masking of autistic traits to ‘fit in’, 
dominated this theme. Enormous amounts of emotional 
energy are required to manage the nature and frequency of 
social interactions, both ‘work-based’ interactions such as 
meetings and ‘social-based’ interactions. Understanding 
and following social rules, interpreting others’ actions and 
reactions, masking autistic behaviours, and combining 
‘professional’ and ‘personal’ interactions are effortful 
activities for many autistic people. Aspects that non-autis-
tic people find relaxing and enjoyable (such as morning 
teas and after-work drinks) can be very challenging for 
autistic people. Participants frequently mentioned the 
sheer number of meetings that take place each day in aca-
demia as a difficult aspect of academic roles. In addition to 
the energy required to participate in the conversation, frus-
trations arise around the management of meetings and the 
time that is wasted when there are more efficient ways of 
achieving outcomes.
The transient nature of academia adds to the intensity of 
the effort required to maintain social interaction. While we 
may have a consistent group of colleagues (as in other pro-
fessions), the academic year brings new cohorts of stu-
dents, and conferences and meetings bring new 
‘colleagues’. Some participants also noted having prosop-
agnosia (face blindness), a more common condition among 
autistic people (Minio-Paluello et al., 2020), and the addi-
tional challenges this brings to social interactions.
I also find some social aspects of the job to be tricky; 
sometimes it’s easy to connect with others over shared 
interests, but I’m often unsure how to read a situation. And 
again, with new classes and new work assignments every 
semester, I’m constantly having to navigate new groups of 
people and figure out how we’re going to work together. 
(Dee)
Social interactions take time and energy that is needed to 
complete work, creating an ever-present need to balance 
the work we are paid to do with the social expectations of 
colleagues. The tendency of autistic people to be intensely 
focused on the activity they are engaged in can be mis-
taken for rudeness or hostility. A lack of assertiveness and 
difficulties with spontaneous communication can be mis-
taken for disinterest or lower capacity. For some partici-
pants, this social aspect went beyond the energy 
requirements of social interaction; they also had the worry 
of exclusion or hostility from colleagues. The political 
nature of the workplace was a common topic of reflection 
Jones	
825
concerning the challenges of academia: understanding the 
hierarchical structure of the organisation, the nuances of 
power and alliances and the need to intuit the hidden mean-
ing behind communications.
I know that I simply don’t have the skills or the capacity to 
play those nuanced neurotypical games of interpersonal 
snakes and ladders, and most of the time I’m completely 
unaware that they’re even going on. . .. I know that I’m likely 
missing out on opportunities because I’m not able to access 
the social politics of academia, and that’s sometimes 
frustrating. (Alex)
The tendency of autistic people to be honest and direct, to 
be uncomfortable with deception and unable to detect 
deception in others can put us at a distinct disadvantage 
in a work context that is fundamentally competitive. 
There is constant competition for positions, funding, pro-
motion and – sadly – like high school, there is competi-
tion for social status. The interaction between the politics 
that appear to be inherent in academia and some of the 
intrinsic aspects of autism (anxiety, perseveration, per-
fectionism) results in strain on some autistics working in 
academia, with negative outcomes that extend beyond 
the workplace.
Frustration with the lack of commitment and compe-
tence of others in the workplace – both colleagues and stu-
dents – was evident in many of the reflections. Those who 
place high expectations on themselves and work hard to 
achieve these find it difficult to understand and accept the 
lackadaisical attitude of others.
I really hate it when I delegate a task to someone and then 
when I look at it, it has mistakes in it or they haven’t formatted 
it consistently. Also it really annoys me when people can’t do 
basic things then they ask me to do it – I only know how to do 
things because I have taken the time to understand how things 
work, have experimented and figured things out for myself. 
(Olivia)
It would be easy to assume that these social challenges are 
only experienced by those in the early stages of their 
career, but similar themes were evident in the reflections 
of participants with lengthy careers in academia and those 
in leadership roles.
However, the participants’ reflections also emphasised 
great enjoyment and satisfaction in aspects of interper-
sonal interactions, particularly those that provide oppor-
tunities to help others. This was particularly evident in 
the context of sharing their knowledge with others, which 
was seen as the highlight of teaching roles. This went 
beyond the direct transmission of knowledge, reflecting 
not the stereotype of ‘info-dumping’ on others, but the 
value of sharing information in a way that helps others 
learn. As Lisa expressed it, ‘Imparting large amounts of 
insight to smart students fast, giving them the tools to 
navigate the world better once they get out there’. Equally 
evident in the reflections was that a positive aspect of 
teaching for autistic academics is the ability to help stu-
dents. Participants commented on the enjoyment of 
watching students succeed, whether this was the short-
term success of completing an assignment, or the longer-
term completion of a research degree or commencement 
of employment. This was particularly the case in relation 
to assisting students who experience marginalisation and/
or disadvantage.
. . .student’s face when they finally get something after 
they’ve been struggling to understand it. (i.e. ‘light bulb’ 
moment) spec con student finally completing subject or 
sitting exam, etc. (Jane)
Many participants reflected that a strong motivator and 
positive aspect of working in academia was the ability to 
help others and make positive changes in the world. 
Academia can provide an opportunity to undertake mean-
ingful research and advocacy and to fight for social justice, 
an area of importance for many autistic people. This 
included those working in the autism field – contributing 
to improved outcomes for autistic people – and those 
working in other fields that enable them to contribute to 
the wellbeing of people who experience marginalisation 
and/or disadvantage.
I love the opportunity this work gives me to make a difference 
in people’s lives and create systems change that could make 
the world better for the next generations of autistic people and 
people with other disabilities or intersectional identities. 
(Sunny)
There’s a lot to juggle
Various aspects of working in academia are widely 
acknowledged as challenging for all neurotypes but are 
exacerbated for autistics. These include job insecurity, low 
salary compared to many other careers, demanding work-
load and the competitive nature of academic environments. 
Other aspects of the role that can be exacting for autistic 
people include rigid processes, breadth of activity, lack of 
autonomy and ‘performance’ standards.
The lack of job security inherent in the role of early 
career researcher or teacher is problematic for people 
who struggle with uncertainty and change. The casual 
nature of the workforce means that there is ongoing 
uncertainty for those who do not have tenure. Numerous 
participants commented on aspects of their autism that 
exacerbate, or are exacerbated by, their ability to manage 
the heavy workload of academia. The former included 
underlying generalised anxiety, perfectionism and infor-
mation processing. The latter included environmental, 
social and communication challenges. While many par-
ticipants reported meeting or exceeding the expectations 
826	
Autism 27(3)
of their colleagues and supervisors, this was achieved at 
a considerable cost to their physical and mental health.
I am a perfectionist (which could be seen as both a strength 
and a weakness). As such students often comment on how 
well delivered or presented my topics are, however this leads 
to me burning out and experiencing extreme anxiety and 
overwhelm (usually around Sept/Oct each year). (Scarlett)
Rigid processes and protocols present challenges for autis-
tic people working in academia, particularly the adherence 
to inefficient or inappropriate rules and processes. Related 
to this is the frustration for autistics when they have identi-
fied alternative processes that would improve productivity 
and increase the quality of outcomes. Participants noted 
the lack of autonomy in academia as a challenge, particu-
larly those in administrative roles and junior members of 
research and/or teaching teams. However, some partici-
pants noted that challenges in academia also come from 
too much autonomy when this is operationalised as a lack 
of clear direction. While there is a focus on specialisation 
in many areas of academia, there is also a breadth of activ-
ity required and an expectation of a broad range of skills 
assumed to be inherent in people employed in academia.
One of the challenges of academia is that it requires one be 
competent in many areas – one can’t specialize and focus only 
on one or two little domains where one is especially skilled. 
One needs to be able to network, write papers, understand and 
implement research methods, hire and supervise other people, 
etc. (Scott)
Participants reflected on the performance aspect of the 
academic role in the context of conference presentations, 
media interviews and other forms of public speaking. 
However, it was of particular concern in teaching. While 
the transmission of knowledge is one of the most enjoyed 
aspects of academia for this cohort, the social dimensions 
of teaching can be draining because the onus of communi-
cation is on the autistic person who is there to educate and 
entertain.
. . .as a professor I am not much of a performer. I am excited 
by the work and by talking about it, but I am not flashy. I am 
not charismatic. I have been told that I’m intimidating. I go 
out of my way to be warm and friendly, but it doesn’t come 
naturally. Students seem to expect entertainment as much as 
education these days, and I am not a natural entertainer. 
(Saskia)
Positive aspects of the academic’s role reflected on by par-
ticipants included flexibility and autonomy. References to 
flexibility included the flexibility of where to work, par-
ticularly the option to work at home; when to work, includ-
ing the ability to schedule work around energy levels; and 
how to work, notably the flexibility around how and how 
often to engage in social interaction. The flexible nature of 
many roles in academia provides opportunities to control 
when and where participants complete their work.
You can work from home and work by yourself a lot of the 
time, while still maintaining some degree of social interaction 
for teaching or meetings. (Amy)
Other aspects of autonomy that participants highly valued 
include the capacity to make their own decisions, focus on 
areas of research and/or teaching of interest to them and 
work in ways that suit their cognitive processes and sensory 
needs. Additional positive aspects of academic roles dis-
cussed in the reflections included the potential for career 
progression and job stability, being able to follow a routine, 
visible indicators of success such as winning grants or hav-
ing papers published and employment conditions such as 
generous leave provisions and superannuation.
We have different operating systems
Differences in information processing processes and 
styles pose challenges in the predominantly neurotypical 
workplace of academia. These included learning styles, 
information processing speed, dealing with change, varia-
tions in information processing capacity and information 
synthesis.
Numerous participants reflected on being a visual 
learner in a context where information is often presented 
verbally with no visual aids, such as in conferences and 
meetings. Working in a context where speed of informa-
tion processing can be paramount was identified as a chal-
lenge. Academic environments often value rapid responses 
– whether that involves a snappy answer to a question or 
fast-paced marking of assessments. For people who pro-
cess information carefully and conscientiously, with a 
focus on determining the most articulate response, this 
expectation can result in missing out on opportunities or 
not being heard. The frequency of change in the academic 
environment and the related expectation that we will be 
able to absorb and implement changes rapidly create con-
siderable stress for this autistic cohort.
Some commented on the apparent paradox of under-
standing and working with complex information that others 
grapple with while struggling to process fundamental con-
cepts that appear intuitive to others. Similarly, participants 
reflected on difficulties in identifying key points of infor-
mation, separating the detail from the big picture and know-
ing where to focus energy. This included aspects of the 
academic role such as reading literature, writing for publi-
cation, reviewing others’ writing and preparing lectures.
I struggle to focus with writing. *Everything* is important 
about a topic, because it wouldn’t be what it is without all the 
details. So the advice when publishing in my discipline to ‘tell 
us what’s important, not what you know’ is pretty much 
impossible. (Liam)
Jones	
827
Executive functioning challenges interact with the com-
plex nature of academic roles. Reflections included 
issues of managing deadlines and requirements, organis-
ing data, staying on top of tasks, remembering things that 
need to be done, initiating activities, switching between 
activities and maintaining focus. A common issue was 
being in a role that required working on multiple projects 
simultaneously and the cognitive load involved in man-
aging the range of tasks, competing deadlines and differ-
ent task requirements. All participants who mentioned 
executive functioning challenges also outlined the strate-
gies they have put in place to address them, including 
writing copious lists, setting up calendar reminders and 
using a range of physical and electronic organisation 
tools. Some compensated for executive functioning limi-
tations by taking on part-time roles but working more 
hours than they were paid for, others by living with a 
constant feeling that they were not meeting the goals set 
for them, and others by pushing themselves to the extreme 
to meet the expectations of supervisors. However, it was 
also evident that managing their executive functioning 
challenges – while remaining model employees who con-
sistently meet the demands of the role – significantly 
impacts their wellbeing.
Challenges include multitasking and managing executive 
function issues, so I stay organized and on task, otherwise 
I get quickly overwhelmed and stressed. Staying organized 
and on top of everything takes a huge amount of energy 
and I often come home exhausted, shutdown and nonverbal 
from the effort of socializing and organizing myself. 
(Trevor)
However, there are definite positives of academic work 
roles for autistic people. The cerebral aspects of the role 
serve as major attractions to, and benefits of, working in 
academia. These include the ability to focus on an area of 
interest and the more general intellectual components of 
the role. For those fortunate enough to be in research or 
teaching areas aligned with their interests, academia pro-
vides a rare environment where autistic special interests 
are seen as valuable expertise (rather than ‘weird obses-
sions’). The academic environment offers an opportunity 
to exercise many of the cognitive strengths of autistic peo-
ple, including our intense focus, capacity to recognise pat-
terns and ability to generate novel solutions. As Olivia 
reflected, ‘I feel that I am finally using my brain properly’. 
It also values personal characteristics that may be under-
valued in other careers, such as perseverance, perfection-
ism and attention to detail.
I am being paid to conduct research that I am personally and 
professionally enamoured with. Call it a special interest or 
weird obsession or whatever other people may label it but for 
me there are some days I cannot believe I am as lucky as I am 
to be in the position I am in. (Flora)
We speak different languages
Participants identified communication in the workplace as 
a significant challenge, both understanding and being 
understood by others. Challenges in receptive communica-
tion included understanding questions from students and 
colleagues, understanding and following vague instructions 
from supervisors and following conversations with others. 
As with non-work interactions, these issues are exacerbated 
by the energy required to manage the sensory overload that 
accompanies interpersonal interactions, particularly in 
group settings. Challenges in expressive communication 
included difficulty finding the right words, expressions and 
tone of voice; being expected to respond spontaneously; 
knowing how to start and end conversations; and a frequent 
feeling that others don’t understand their communication.
. . . the many interactions required over a day or a week can be 
draining. I’m not so good at knowing how to end conversations, 
so I often let conversations go on much longer than my time 
or energy permits. (Marie)
Many of these communication issues stem from different 
ways of thinking and being in the neuro-minority in the 
workplace. Participants described complex, high-level 
internal thinking processes, including making links between 
seemingly unrelated concepts, visual thinking and being 
able to perceive and think in patterns. While these are com-
mon strengths of autistic brains (Crespi, 2021) and contrib-
ute to our ability to develop complex and novel solutions to 
problems, they can be difficult to explain to others. These 
differences in processing and communication styles also 
result in contributions being overlooked or dismissed, and 
a feeling of not being a valued team member.
Difficulties in written communication are also prob-
lematic for autistic people working in hierarchical univer-
sity environments, particularly learning the nuances of 
correspondence such as emails and formal letters. These 
skills are perceived to be intuitive to non-autistic people, 
and there is often a lack of awareness that autistics may 
need additional support to learn these complex social rules.
Participants discussed being sensitive to criticism from 
others and being worn down by negative feedback from 
supervisors, colleagues or students. While recognising that 
this reaction to criticism was in part due to oversensitivity, 
participants also noted that there was often unfair criticism 
due to poor communication from others or a tendency to 
attribute problems to them with their autism seen as the ‘rea-
son’ for problems arising. Several mentioned internalising 
this criticism and perseverating over how they may have con-
tributed to the communication issues or negative outcomes.
I automatically take things to heart too quickly if I think that 
someone has criticised my work, particularly since I’m 
working my butt off and it’s unpaid. I’m consciously trying to 
make myself change that automatic response. . .. (Ava)
828	
Autism 27(3)
Widespread lack of awareness of, and misunderstandings 
about, autism create challenges in the workplace. Many 
expend considerable emotional energy trying to correct 
these misperceptions but find themselves ignored or dis-
missed based on ‘learnings’ from media exposure or lim-
ited contact with autistic people. A common concern was 
the impact of others’ negative and dismissive comments 
about autism. Those who had disclosed experienced nega-
tive impacts due to ableist assumptions about their capac-
ity, and those who had not disclosed by offhand insults 
about autism from people unaware of their diagnosis. 
These challenges were in some ways greater for those 
working specifically in autism research, with constant 
exposure to the literature that positions autism as a deficit 
and to practices that are harmful to autistic people.
. . . being an autistic autism researcher can be very hard. So 
much of the literature I have to read is, at best, incredibly 
ableist and, at worst, completely dehumanizing. People do not 
consider that I may be autistic when they meet me, and speak 
to me in ways that is often very upsetting and insulting about 
autism and autistic people. (Louise)
Intersectionality poses additional challenges, with partici-
pants experiencing offensive and demeaning commentary 
about multiple aspects of their identity. Issues of discrimi-
nation based on gender, race, sexuality and other charac-
teristics are cumulative and contribute to feeling 
unwelcome or unsafe in academia. For some, this creates a 
hostile work environment that is both exhausting and 
damaging.
I also experienced enough antisemitism in my academic 
career to make me feel terribly isolated. One of the problems 
is that I was never sure if people hate me because I am autistic, 
or if they hate me because I’m Jewish. (Mia)
Conversely, participants reflected that academia presents 
opportunities for connection that enable us to utilise our 
strengths, be recognised as equals and participate in a 
meaningful way. The ability to connect over shared inter-
ests and goals provides a structure for social interaction 
and acknowledgement of our strengths rather than our 
challenges.
What I love about my job, weirdly enough, is the connection 
with people. I love sharing a special interest with someone 
and watching the lightbulb go off as they ‘get it’ and appreciate 
how fascinating it is. Shared fascination is like shared awe: a 
singular, bonding experience. (Saskia)
Senses working overdrive
Physical aspects of the work environment pose additional 
challenges for autistic academics, particularly those with 
sensory sensitivities. The most common concerns raised 
were bright lights, noise and air-conditioning. Several 
participants commented that this constant sensory input 
led to sensory overload and meltdown.
I have sensory integration issues in classrooms and offices 
where bright lights are used. I also struggle with air-
conditioners and find it difficult to maintain my composure 
when a room is too cold for me. (Trina)
Institutional policies exacerbate these sensory challenges; 
factors such as who is ‘entitled’ to an office, lack of aware-
ness and willingness to make necessary environmental 
adjustments. It is noteworthy that several of these reflec-
tions came from participants who work in institutions that 
one would expect to be responsive to sensory issues, such 
as an autism-focused research and training centre. While 
many participants expressed frustration with the status 
quo, others seemed resigned to working in inappropriate 
conditions despite the cost to their wellbeing (and the min-
imal expense and effort it would require for organisations 
to address these issues).
And the office that they put me in for when I do go in to the 
office, pre-COVID, of course, it’s quite bright, and they 
thought they’d try and help by removing a light bulb above 
my desk, but that doesn’t really help. But it’s the thought that 
counts. And they also seated me next to, like in sort of a 
shared office, and there’s quite a bit of movement, which is 
quite distracting, but I guess they don’t. . . They didn’t really 
sort of think about that, I guess. And yeah, I’m only in there 
once a fortnight, so there’s no point in me making a fuss about 
it. (Charlotte)
However, the flexibility of many academic roles (dis-
cussed above) provides opportunities for autistic academ-
ics to have some degree of control over their physical work 
environment. While they may not be empowered to change 
the shared workplace, the ability to work from home or 
other locations can provide a welcome relief from sensory 
overstimulation.
I also like that my current roles are work-from-home (even 
prior to COVID-19), which suits me very well. I like being 
able to choose my own hours and work in my pyjamas with 
my cat on my lap, and I like not being exhausted from 
interacting with people at the end of each day. (Ella)
Discussion
Autism research conducted with autistic people, position-
ing those with lived experience as partners in research, is 
becoming the norm and the expectation in high-quality 
autism journals. However, much of this discussion still 
positions participatory research as linking two discrete 
groups of individuals: ‘autism researchers’ (non-autistic 
people with research training employed in academia) and 
‘autistic individuals’ (non-research trained people with 
lived experience of autism). What is often missing from 
Jones	
829
the discussion is autism research conducted by autistic 
people – that is, autistic people working within universities 
and other research organisations.
An autistic autism researcher undertook this study, and 
participants were autistic researchers from a wide range of 
disciplines, many of whom undertake research and/or 
advocacy in autism. As noted in a roundtable discussion on 
the experiences of autistic autism researchers, ‘no aca-
demic articles focusing on autistic scholars in autism 
research currently exist in the literature’ (Dwyer et al., 
2021). The findings of this study support those of the 
exploratory questionnaire study of 12 autistic academics in 
the United Kingdom (Martin, 2021).
This group of autistic people working in academia iden-
tified a range of challenges and frustrations of working in 
academia. They frequently raised aspects of social interac-
tion, interpersonal communication, stigma and discrimina-
tion as causing tension within the workplace, as well as 
leading to anxiety and distress for the autistic employee. 
This is consistent with research into the employment expe-
riences of autistic people in other work contexts. For 
example, a recent multi-country study found that stigma, 
communication challenges and a lack of understanding of 
autism were key barriers to successful employment for 
autistic adults (Black et al., 2020).
A recent survey of 249 autistic teachers in UK primary 
and secondary schools (Wood & Happé, 2021) identified 
the key challenges for that cohort as lack of (autism) 
understanding and support, including limited flexibility 
and work accommodations; sensory overload, change and 
unpredictability; mental health issues such as anxiety, 
fatigue and burnout; and the emotional toll of observing 
poor treatment of autistic pupils.
While academia is seen by many as a privileged and 
relaxed work environment, the reality of modern universities 
is increasing workloads and reduced job security (Cannizzo 
et al., 2019; Steenkamp & Roberts, 2020), to the extent that a 
healthy work-life balance is difficult to maintain (Cannizzo 
et al., 2019). The constant social interaction and the need to 
‘fit in’ imposes pressure on autistic employees to mask aspects 
of their autism, which impacts physical and emotional well-
being and career outcomes. While this is not unique to aca-
demia (North, 2021), it is exacerbated by the transient nature 
of social groups (such as student cohorts) and the complex 
dynamics between collaboration and competition.
I’ve started admitting I am autistic and wow – what a mixed 
bag that is. I have people who insist it is a mental illness, 
people who insist I am not and cannot be because their son 
is, to people who either pity me or shun me more. I abhor 
pity. I don’t at all care for being ostracized and shunned 
either. So communication is a challenge. The emotional 
work environment is hugely challenging. I never had such 
issues before, and am quite frankly traumatized by things 
that have happened to me here. So I am now alone. I never 
was alone before. (Isabella)
The competitive nature of academia, with its implicit moti-
vators to withhold knowledge from others, is problematic 
even for neurotypical people (Hernaus et al., 2019) but is 
exacerbated for autistic academics who typically have 
fewer social networks. A recent study concluded that a 
competitive psychological climate is associated with high 
work engagement and career success for people with high 
leader-member exchange (strong relationships between 
employees and supervisors) but with burnout and lower 
career success for those with low leader-member exchange 
(Spurk et al., 2021).
Executive functioning challenges – including obtain-
ing, retaining and processing information – were raised by 
participants as impacting their academic employment suc-
cess. This is consistent with a recent study into employ-
ment experiences of autistic adults which found 
multi-directional associations between executive function, 
anxiety and work performance (Woolard et al., 2021). 
Academia is an information-rich, rapidly changing work 
environment with a constant need to juggle multiple tasks 
and perspectives, which poses significant challenges for 
people with limitations on their executive functioning and 
working memory (Habib et al., 2019). While aware of 
their executive functioning challenges and consciously 
putting in place strategies to address them, participants 
acknowledged that this constant effort significantly 
impacts their wellbeing.
Consistent with the UK survey of autistic teachers 
(Wood & Happé, 2021), the autistic academics in this 
study also commented on sensory issues related to the 
physical environment such as bright lights, noise and air-
conditioning, and noted that these could be exacerbated by 
institutional policies and lack of awareness among employ-
ers and colleagues.
It was concerning to note the extent to which many par-
ticipants accepted the challenges of working in academia as 
inevitable and/or requiring them to ‘try harder’ to navigate 
these challenges. As Martin et al. (2019) note, autistic 
employees can flourish in the workplace when provided with 
supportive working environments; employers need to be 
aware of, and willing to provide, the reasonable adjustments 
that autistic employees require to achieve their potential.
Conversely, participants identified significant benefits of 
academia as a career choice for autistic individuals. The life 
of an academic is one of deep engagement with areas of 
interest and where comprehensive knowledge of a specific 
topic is seen as a strength rather than an anomaly. Autistic 
strengths – such as intense focus, capacity to recognise pat-
terns, ability to generate novel solutions, perseverance, per-
fectionism and attention to detail – can come to the fore in 
academia in a way that makes this an ideal profession for our 
neurotype. Also consistent with the findings of the UK 
teacher study (Wood & Happé, 2021), these academics noted 
that their ability to connect with and support students – par-
ticularly those experiencing marginalisation or disadvantage 
830	
Autism 27(3)
– was both a strength and a benefit of this career choice. 
Academia provides a unique setting to utilise our enthusiasm 
for sharing our knowledge and providing others with a nur-
turing and supportive learning environment.
I like that my supervisor treats me as an equal and provides 
me with so many opportunities to learn and grow, I genuinely 
like the vast majority of my colleagues and what’s not to love 
about working on one of your special interests day in and day 
out? In many respects, this is my ideal job. (Louise)
For those fortunate to have supportive colleagues and 
employers, and to work in an institution that understands 
and addresses the needs of autistic people, the life of an 
academic has many other positive aspects. These include 
flexibility in working style and location, autonomy and 
independence, predictable routines, visible measures of 
success, and good employment conditions. In addition, 
academia provides the opportunity to make a meaningful 
contribution to others – from teaching an individual stu-
dent to researching solutions to world problems.
Conclusion
This study identified a number of challenges faced by 
autistic people working in academia across a range of 
countries and disciplines. Many of these challenges could 
be remediated by adjustments to the physical environment 
and workload, such as flexible working hours and work 
spaces that allow control over sensory input. Others dem-
onstrate the need to educate supervisors and colleagues on 
how to work with and support autistic employees. Above 
all, creating safe and supportive work environments for 
autistic academics requires a greater understanding of the 
strengths of autistic people and acceptance of diversity in 
ways of working. Given the considerable benefits that 
autistic teachers and researchers bring to higher education, 
there is a clear need for universities and colleges to imple-
ment changes to the physical and social environment to 
make academia more inclusive.
Acknowledgements
The author thanks Amandine Catala, Dave Caudel, Patrick 
Dwyer, Laura Gilmour, Sarah Grant, Jessica Harrison, Fiona 
Lee, Dora Raymaker, Penny Robinson, Phoenix Shetty, Sarah 
Thorneycroft, TC Waisman, and 25 other anonymous autistic 
academics for sharing their reflections throughout the study.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with 
respect to the research, authorship and/or publication of this 
article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, 
authorship and/or publication of this article.
ORCID iD
Sandra C Jones 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0258-3348
Supplemental material
Supplemental material for this article is available online.
References
Black, M. H., Mahdi, S., Milbourn, B., Scott, M., Gerber, A., 
Esposito, C., Falkmer, M., Lerner, M. D., Halladay, A., 
Ström, E., D’Angelo, A., Falkmer, T., Bölte, S., & Girdler, 
S. (2020). Multi-informant international perspectives on 
the facilitators and barriers to employment for autistic 
adults. Autism Research, 13(7), 1195–1214. https://doi.
org/10.1002/aur.2288
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2019). Reflecting on reflexive the-
matic analysis. Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise 
and Health, 11(4), 589–597. https://doi.org/10.1080/21596
76X.2019.1628806
Cage, E., & Howes, J. (2020). Dropping out and moving 
on: A qualitative study of autistic people’s experiences 
of university. Autism, 24(7), 1664–1675. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1362361320918750
Cai, R. Y., & Richdale, A. L. (2016). Educational experiences 
and needs of higher education students with autism spectrum 
disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 
46(1), 31–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-015-2535-1
Cannizzo, F., Mauri, C., & Osbaldiston, N. (2019). Moral barriers 
between work/life balance policy and practice in academia. 
Journal of Cultural Economy, 12(4), 251–264. https://doi.
org/10.1080/17530350.2019.1605400
Chandrasekhar, T. (2020). Supporting the needs of college stu-
dents with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of American 
College Health, 68(8), 936–939. https://doi.org/10.1080/07
448481.2019.1686003
Chiang, H. M., Cheung, Y. K., Hickson, L., Xiang, R., & Tsai, L. 
Y. (2012). Predictive factors of participation in postsecond-
ary education for high school leavers with autism. Journal 
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 42(5), 685–696. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-011-1297-7
Crespi, B. (2021). Pattern unifies autism [Perspective]. Frontiers 
in Psychiatry, 12, Article 621659. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyt.2021.621659
DeNigris, D., Brooks, P. J., Obeid, R., Alarcon, M., Shane-
Simpson, C., & Gillespie-Lynch, K. (2018). Bullying and 
identity development: Insights from autistic and non-autis-
tic college students. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders, 48(3), 666–678. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-
017-3383-y
Dwyer, P., Acevedo, S. M., Brown, H. M., Grapel, J., Jones, S. 
C., Nachman, B. R., Raymaker, D. M., & Williams, Z. J. 
(2021). An expert roundtable discussion on experiences of 
autistic autism researchers. Autism in Adulthood, 3(3), 209–
220. https://doi.org/10.1089/aut.2021.29019.rtb
Elias, R., & White, S. W. (2018). Autism goes to college: 
Understanding the needs of a student population on the rise. 
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 48(3), 
732–746. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-017-3075-7
Flower, R. L., Richdale, A. L., & Lawson, L. P. (2021). Brief 
Report: What happens after school? Exploring post-school 
Jones	
831
outcomes for a group of autistic and non-autistic Australian 
youth. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 
51(4), 1385–1391. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-020-
04600-6
Goddard, H., & Cook, A. (2022). ‘I spent most of Freshers in 
my room’ – A qualitative study of the social experiences 
of university students on the autistic spectrum. Journal of 
Autism Developmental Disorders, 52, 2701–2716. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10803-021-05125-2
Gurbuz, E., Hanley, M., & Riby, D. M. (2019). University stu-
dents with autism: The social and academic experiences of 
university in the UK. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders, 49(2), 617–631. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-
018-3741-4
Habib, A., Harris, L., Pollick, F., & Melville, C. (2019). A meta-
analysis of working memory in individuals with autism 
spectrum disorders. PLOS ONE, 14(4), Article e0216198. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0216198
Hernaus, T., Cerne, M., Connelly, C., Vokic, N. P., & Škerlavaj, 
M. (2019). Evasive knowledge hiding in academia: When 
competitive individuals are asked to collaborate. Journal of 
Knowledge Management, 23(4), 597–618.
Lei, J., Ashwin, C., Brosnan, M., & Russell, A. (2019). 
Developing an online tool to measure social network struc-
ture and perceived social support amongst autistic students 
in higher education: A feasibility study. Journal of Autism 
and Developmental Disorders, 49(9), 3526–3542. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10803-019-04070-5
Lei, J., Ashwin, C., Brosnan, M., & Russell, A. (2020). 
Differences in anxieties and social networks in a group-
matched sample of autistic and typically developing stu-
dents transitioning to university. Autism, 24(5), 1138–1151. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361319894830
Martin, N. (2021). Perspectives on UK university employment 
from autistic researchers and lecturers. Disability & Society, 
36(9), 1510–1531. https://doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2020.
1802579
Martin, N., Barnham, C., & Krupa, J. (2019). Identifying and 
addressing barriers to employment of autistic adults. Journal 
of Inclusive Practice in Further and Higher Education, 
10(1), 56–77.
McLeod, J. D., Meanwell, E., & Hawbaker, A. (2019). The expe-
riences of college students on the autism spectrum: A com-
parison to their neurotypical peers. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders, 49(6), 2320–2336. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10803-019-03910-8
Milton, D. E. M., Ridout, S., Kourti, M., Loomes, G., & Martin, 
N. (2019). A critical reflection on the development of the 
Participatory Autism Research Collective (PARC). Tizard 
Learning Disability Review, 24(2), 82–89. https://doi.
org/10.1108/TLDR-09-2018-0029
Minio-Paluello, I., Porciello, G., Pascual-Leone, A., & Baron-
Cohen, S. (2020). Face individual identity recognition: 
A potential endophenotype in autism. Molecular Autism, 
11(1), Article 81. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-020-
00371-0
North, G. (2021). Reconceptualising ‘reasonable adjustments’ 
for the successful employment of autistic women. Disability 
& Society. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1
080/09687599.2021.1971065
Raymaker, D. M. (2017). Reflections of a community-based par-
ticipatory researcher from the intersection of disability advo-
cacy, engineering, and the academy. Action Research, 15(3), 
258–275. https://doi.org/10.1177/1476750316636669
Spurk, D., Hofer, A., & Kauffeld, S. (2021). Why does com-
petitive psychological climate foster or hamper career 
success? The role of challenge and hindrance pathways 
and leader-member-exchange. Journal of Vocational 
Behavior, 127, Article 103542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jvb.2021.103542
Steenkamp, N., & Roberts, R. (2020). Does workload and insti-
tutional pressure on accounting educators affect academia 
at Australian universities? Accounting & Finance, 60(1), 
471–506. https://doi.org/10.1111/acfi.12340
Taylor, N. C., & Johnson, J. H. (2020). Challenges and solu-
tions for autism in academic geosciences. Advances in 
Geosciences, 53, Article 33. https://doi.org/10.5194/adgeo-
53-33-2020
Walker, N., & Raymaker, D. M. (2020). Toward a neuro-
queer future: An interview with Nick Walker. Autism in 
Adulthood, 3(1), 5–10. https://doi.org/10.1089/aut.2020 
.29014.njw
Wood, R., & Happé, F. (2021). What are the views and experi-
ences of autistic teachers? Findings from an online survey 
in the UK. Disability & Society. Advance online publica-
tion. https://doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2021.1916888
Woolard, A., Stratton, E., Demetriou, E. A., Boulton, K. A., 
Pellicano, E., Glozier, N., Gibbs, V., Rogerson, N., Quinn, 
P., Hickie, I. B., & Guastella, A. J. (2021). Perceptions of 
social and work functioning are related to social anxiety and 
executive function in autistic adults. Autism, 25(7), 2124–
2134. https://doi.org/10.1177/13623613211013664
